1) The Prince (1532)
Now I say that those dominions which, when acquired, are added to an ancient state by him who acquires them, are either of the same country and language, or they are not. When they are, it is easier to hold them, especially when they have not been accustomed to self-government; and to hold them securely it is enough to have destroyed the family of the prince who was ruling them; because the two peoples, preserving in other things the old conditions, and not being unlike in customs, will live quietly together, as one has seen in Brittany, Burgundy, Gascony, and Normandy, which have been bound to France for so long a time: and, although there may be some difference in language, nevertheless the customs are alike, and the people will easily be able to get on amongst themselves. He who has annexed them, if he wishes to hold them, has only to bear in mind two considerations: the one, that the family of their former lord is extinguished; the other, that neither their laws nor their taxes are altered, so that in a very short time they will become entirely one body with the old principality.






2) Utopia (1516)


I must begin by saying who the Utopians are; for there are several sorts of them, by which their laws are given to the world; though not rashly or without consideration, but after long consultation and debate. For the chief reason why they were reformed and instituted a new government, was, their having long ago observed the malice and craft of those private men, who, under the pretext of public good, (and some of them thinking the commonwealth, to which they promised fidelity, was too slow in its operations,) began to grow rich, or at least not to grow poor so fast as they would have done, had not their aggrandizement and their country's ruin proceeded with an equal pace. They saw, at length, that no way of succeeding so effectually secured a man's property and quiet, as the profession of arms.




3) The Praise of Folly (1511)


Behold, the most sublime gift bestowed upon mankind – Folly! Oh, how she dances merrily through the corridors of power, her cap adorned with bells that jingle with the sweet melody of human absurdity. In her divine revelry, Folly exposes the pretensions of the learned and the wise, revealing their conceited pursuits and empty wisdom. Blessed is the fool who, untouched by the burdens of reason, embraces the joyous folly of life. For what purpose does man strive in the pursuit of knowledge and virtue when the true path to happiness lies in the arms of delightful foolishness? The great men of the world, with their grand ambitions and solemn airs, are but players in Folly's grand comedy. She mocks their seriousness and revels in the chaos of their well-laid plans. Let the wise philosopher ponder in vain, for in the end, it is Folly who triumphs. Her laughter echoes through the annals of history, a timeless reminder that, in the theater of life, the jesters hold the most profound truths.




4) Orlando Furioso (poem) (1516)


Good seed of Hercules, give ear and deign,
Thou that this age's grace and splendour art,
Hippolitus, to smile upon his pain
Who tenders what he has with humble heart.
For though all hope to quit the score were vain,
My pen and pages may pay the debt in part;
Then, with no jealous eye my offering scan,
Nor scorn my gifts who give thee all I can.
And me, amid the worthiest shalt thou hear,
Whom I with fitting praise prepare to grace,
Record the good Rogero, valiant peer,
The ancient root of thine illustrious race.
Of him, if thou wilt lend a willing ear,
The worth and warlike feats I shall retrace;
So thou thy graver cares some little time
Postponing, lend thy leisure to my rhyme.






5) In Praise of Folly (1511)


In this fool’s paradise, then, let every man be delighted with his own follies; let him pride himself in knowing nothing; let him be puffed up with the reputation of his ignorance, provided he does not fail in those two grand arts of self-commendation, Impudence and Ingratitude. Under the protection of these two, he may lay his shoulders to the wheel, and make his fortune by any means; for, without any manner of doubt, impudence will carry a man through the world, where modesty has never been known to rise above the girdle.


Indeed, what business has modesty in the world at all? or what good does it do, but to clog the heels of action, and make one languish in the pursuit of honour and fortune? What has been the rise of the most considerable families, the means by which they have gained the highest employments, or the resources by which they have retrieved their desperate circumstances? Has it not been entirely owing to their being less scrupulous than other men? Nay, have not their fortunes been still more effectually advanced by downright impudence?—the most necessary and beneficial talent in the world; without which a man, let his parts be never so good, will sink into obscurity and contempt.


It is this which recommends fools to princes, and sets them upon the pinnacle of favour. Fools are insensible of their own miseries; and, consequently, always contented with themselves. The truth is, this talent supplies the want of all others, and is so far from being a blemish, that it is the best qualification a man can be master of; and, if a man happens to be without it, the more sense he has, the more miserable he must be. Let him be as judicious as he will, if he is destitute of this talent, he will find himself the scorn of fools, and the contempt of wise men.


6) The Book of the Courtier (1528)


In the courtly realm, where grace and virtue converge, the courtier stands as a paragon of excellence. He is adorned with the subtle elegance of speech, the artful mastery of arms, and the refined refinement of manners. To attain such perfection, one must navigate the delicate balance between humility and pride, blending the wisdom of the scholar with the prowess of the warrior.
The courtier, a consummate diplomat, must possess the ability to engage in discourse on a myriad of subjects, from the poetic to the philosophical, with an effortless fluency that captivates the minds of those in attendance. His eloquence, like a well-tuned instrument, resonates with the harmony of wit and wisdom.
Yet, the courtier's accomplishments extend beyond the realm of intellect. In the martial arena, he must demonstrate a formidable prowess, embodying the chivalric ideals of bravery and honor. The ability to wield both pen and sword with equal dexterity distinguishes the courtier as a multifaceted jewel in the glittering tapestry of courtly life.
In the court of idealized splendor, the courtier cultivates not only the outward graces but also the inner virtues. His comportment is marked by a gracious humility, veiled beneath a cloak of naturalness that conceals artifice. He must possess the virtue of sprezzatura, a studied nonchalance that adds a subtle charm to his every action.
Thus, in the pursuit of courtly perfection, the courtier becomes a paragon of virtue, a living embodiment of the ideals that grace the halls of the court. Castiglione's work stands as a timeless guide, offering a roadmap to those aspiring to tread the illustrious path of the courtier and leave an indelible mark on the annals of courtly history.




7) The Decameron (1353)


In the time of the great and deadly mortality that befell, not many years since, there were certain worthy gentlemen and gentlewomen, dwelling in a country place, who, in the early days of the pestilence, lived, without any anxiety, in a happy and contented ignorance of what was impending. But when the evil had spread from one place to another, and had taken such a hold upon men that it almost entirely swept away the whole population, those persons, seeing others die in great numbers, and being in constant fear of death, began to consider how they might avoid it, or at least put it off as long as possible. And the expedient to which they had recourse was to quit their own homes and families, and to retire to a country residence which belonged to one of them, standing at a distance from any habitation, or even any frequented road. Here they proposed to dwell, counting on their good fortune in having previously escaped the contagion; and, taking with them what was necessary for their daily subsistence, they closed the doors and windows, resolved to hold no communication with anyone outside, and to spend their time in all sorts of merriment and feasting, and amusing themselves with music and such other diversions as they could devise. Each of them took with him a servant, so that they were in all seven persons; and as there were four ladies and three gentlemen, the former took the kitchen departments, and prepared the meals with the assistance of the servants, whilst the gentlemen devoted themselves to such other occupations as seemed best calculated to pass the time agreeably.




8) The Anatomy of Melancholy (1621)


I write of melancholy by being busy to avoid melancholy. There is no greater cause of melancholy than idleness; no better cure than business. I write of no diseases, nor purport to treat of them, but insist alone upon the causes, symptoms, and cures of this our English malady, 'melancholy,' this 'disease of the head and bowels,' as our old Burton aptly calls it. Insomuch that, if I were now to recite all that our home-born Democritus, or our English Seneca, hath written of it, those alone would make a just volume. Yet have I adventured to prescribe so many several cures for such an intricate disease. Not as Oliver in Lucian, to these only, that are patricians or scholars, but to all indifferently, poor as well as rich, base as well as honourable, old as well as young, sick as well as sound. Yet, because it is a pestilent, dangerous, and most contagious disease, I dare not say as Antimachus did to Bellerophon, or as that devil-may-care stoic to his friend Nevisanus:


'Est aliquid quo tendis, et in quod dirigis arcum?
Oculo alio stat acies, ut fortiter ille
Dicat opus.'


But, gently advise them, as Galen and some other, to whom they must necessarily go for help, that they must contain themselves, and go no further. I could indeed be content, and would willingly subscribe to a severe law, a sharp penalty, a mulct, to be inflicted on every man or woman that is sound, and free, and able to go, yet will presume to marry till they have read this tract, and understand how to use themselves as they ought. If they will not do it, for the benefit of others, let them do it upon the same reasons, for their own good. They shall find there a perfect cure for that great inconvenience, which hitherto hath troubled both them and the commonwealth. I say further, Fiat experimentum in corpore vili, since they will needs marry, try it first upon some impotent, peevish, testy, waspish, choleric, poor creature, that hath more diseases than money, and I will be content if he live one year with her.




8) The Fairie Queene (poem) (1590)


A gentle knight was pricking on the plain,
Ycladd in mighty arms and silver shield,
Wherein old dints of deep wounds did remain,
The cruel marks of many a bloody field;
Yet arms till that time did he never wield:
His angry steed did chide his foaming bit,
As much disdaining to the curb to yield:
Full jolly knight he seemed, and fair did sit,
As one for knightly jousts and fierce encounters fit.


And on his breast a bloody cross he bore,
The dear remembrance of his dying Lord,
For whose sweet sake that glorious badge he wore,
And dead, as living, ever him adored:
Upon his shield the like was also scored,
For sovereign hope, which in his help he had.
Right faithful true he was in deed and word;
But of his cheer did seem too solemn sad;
Yet nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.


Upon a great adventure he was bound,
That greatest Gloriana to him gave,
That greatest Glorious Queen of Faerie lond,
To win him worship and her grace to have,
Which of all earthly things he most did crave;
And ever as he rode his heart did earn
To prove his puissance in battle brave
Upon his foe, and his new force to learn;
Upon his foe, a dragon horrible and stern




9) Essays (1580)


I would have the tutor to correct the pupil not only for having said or done amiss, but for evil thoughts or desires; and chiefly for such as are concealed. We are to examine whence the actual fault springs. 'Tis a disease that hides itself from the physician, and 'tis not easy, perhaps, to apprehend whence it comes. The soul indeed is exercised therein; but the body, from whence it should receive assistance, remains stupid and dormant. And therefore, to address the difficulty, for which way will you disengage yourself from this difficulty, unless you have recourse to that ancient rule, and to be more circumspect in your examination?
Till possession be taken, a man that knows himself subject to this infirmity should leisurely and by degrees make several little trials and light offers, without obstinately attempting at once, to force an absolute conquest over his own mutinous and indisposed faculties. The mind is a powerful enemy to all severe and abrupt conclusions.
But above all, our authors do every day fit themselves to be fathers of families, by the flowing, the fulness, and the sweetness of their own souls, leaving the remainder of business to those of meaner and inferior parts.
It is not for them to descend to the vulgar and plebeian broils of which they are only to reap the harvest. Is it not a foolish humour of mine, not only to set my people at variance with one another (for every one is sufficiently inclined to that of himself), but, moreover, to devise and beget so many causes of dissension, and so many pernicious occasions of falling out, which never yet entered into their thoughts? The first of my conduct that springs from my mother, when old age and imbecility betook her to that of devotion, was to make me eat cakes, with a design that I should be often whipped for stealing them, and whipped I was accordingly.




10) Don Quixote (1605)


In short, he so busied himself with his reading that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from dawn to dark, poring over his books, until, at the end of four years, he had read all that were to be had in that language, and nothing was left for him to read; nor did he think that the 'Arcadia' of Sannazaro was worth reading, though it was in Italian; and such was his abstraction and engrossment in his reading, that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from dawn to dark, poring over his books, until, at the end of four years, he had read all that were to be had in that language, and nothing was left for him to read; nor did he think that the 'Arcadia' of Sannazaro was worth reading, though it was in Italian; and such was his abstraction and engrossment in his reading, that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from dawn to dark, poring over his books, until, at the end of four years, he had read all that were to be had in that language, and nothing was left for him to read; nor did he think that the 'Arcadia' of Sannazaro was worth reading, though it was in Italian.




11) The Golden Ass (2nd century)


I awoke at break of day with the first light, and casting off the coverlet of my bed, went to meet the warmth of the rising sun. Then, having gone a little distance, I saw at the end of the garden under a high laurel tree, Phoebus, the god of the day, sitting on the green grass, with his golden hair all spread about his radiant head, and a beaming crown of sunbeams shining brighter than the sun. I saw his sparkling eyes glittering with azure fire, his heavenly countenance smiling sweetly, his fair cheeks blooming with roses, and his rosy lips breathing forth pure ambrosia. His garment was of a shining yellow, interwoven with gold, and beautifully adorned with diverse flowers of the spring, and his feet were enclosed in shoes with golden wings. He had a bow in his left hand, and in his right he twanged the string with his fingers, from which issued soft music with delightful harmony. The curious birds sat listening, the little brooks stood still, the soft air ceased to breathe, the whole grove was silent and attentive to hear the celestial harmony.




12) The Divine Comedy (poem) (1321)


In His will is our peace.
It is that sea to which all things move,
Both what His will provides, and what it does not.
For all that He creates and that nature makes,
He ordered in His mind, and as He willed;
So that His creation may reflect the Good,
With diverse instincts, varied and dispersed,
To diverse natures, in diverse ways.
And as two arrows with one same impulse
Will fall and pierce a single point,
So too, in the same way, shall diverse issues
Result from one nod, which is the Divine.


Those things I saw and understood
Were so in harmony through the like
Which as a wheel moves in unity.
The universal shape and aspect
Of Paradise impressed upon my mind
The life of the mighty stars in Heaven.




13) On the Revolution of Celestial Spheres (1543)


In the divine creation of the universe, I propose a heliocentric model, contrary to the prevailing geocentric worldview. The Earth and other planets orbit the Sun, not the Earth at the center of the cosmos. The celestial spheres, previously conceived as nested, concentric circles around the Earth, now encircle the Sun. My calculations and observations reveal the apparent retrograde motion of planets can be explained by their orbits around the Sun. This heliocentric model simplifies our understanding of planetary motion, providing a more elegant and accurate description of the cosmos.


I present this theory not as an absolute truth but as a mathematical hypothesis. Through rigorous examination, I aim to challenge prevailing beliefs and encourage further astronomical inquiry. This paradigm shift offers a more coherent explanation of celestial phenomena. As we explore the heavens, we must embrace the possibility that our Earth is not the center of the universe, humbling ourselves before the vastness and complexity of the cosmos.






14) The history of the decline and the fall of the Roman Empire (1776)


In the second century of the Christian Era, the Empire of Rome comprehended the fairest part of the earth, and the most civilized portion of mankind. The frontiers of that extensive monarchy were guarded by ancient renown and disciplined valor. The gentle but powerful influence of laws and manners had gradually cemented the union of the provinces. Their peaceful inhabitants enjoyed and abused the advantages of wealth and luxury. The image of a free constitution was preserved with decent reverence: the Roman Senate appeared to possess the sovereign authority, and devolved on the emperors all the executive powers of government. During a happy period  of more than fourscore years, the public administration was conducted by the virtue and abilities of Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and the two Antonines. It is the design of this, and of the two succeeding chapters, to describe the prosperous condition of their empire; and afterwards, from the death of Marcus Antoninus, to deduce the most important circumstances of its decline and fall; a revolution which will ever be remembered, and is still felt by the nations of the earth.


The principal conquests of the Romans were achieved under the republic; and the emperors, for the most part, were satisfied with preserving those dominions which had been acquired by the policy of the Senate, the active emulation of the consuls, and the martial enthusiasm of the people. The seven first centuries were filled with a rapid succession of triumphs; but it was reserved for Augustus to relinquish the ambitious design of subduing the whole earth, and to introduce a spirit of moderation into the public councils. Inclined to peace by his temper and situation, it was easy for him to discover that Rome, in her present exalted situation, had much less to hope than to fear from the chance of arms; and that, in the prosecution of remote wars, the undertaking became every day more difficult, the event more doubtful, and the possession more precarious and less beneficial.




15) The Discourses (1531)


I will leave aside what might be said of cities which from their very birth have been subject to a foreign power, and will speak only of those whose origin has been independent, and which from the first governed themselves by their own laws, whether as republics or as principalities, and whose constitution and laws have differed as their origin. Some have had at the very beginning, or soon after, a legislator, who, like Lycurgus with the Lacedæmonians, gave them by a single act all the laws they needed. Others have owed theirs to chance and to events, and have received their laws at different times, as Rome did. It is a great good fortune for a republic to have a legislator sufficiently wise to give her laws so regulated that, without the necessity of correcting them, they afford security to those who live under them. Sparta observed her laws for more than eight hundred years without altering them and without experiencing a single dangerous disturbance. Unhappy, on the contrary, is that republic which, not having at the beginning fallen into the hands of a sagacious and skilful legislator, is herself obliged to reform her laws. More unhappy still is that republic which from the first has diverged from a good constitution. And that republic is furthest from it whose vicious institutions impede her progress, and make her leave the right path that leads to a good end; for those who are in that condition can hardly ever be brought into the right road. Those republics, on the other hand, that started without having even a perfect constitution, but made a fair beginning, and are capable of improvement, – such republics, I say, may perfect themselves by the aid of events. It is very true, however, that such reforms are never effected without danger, for the majority of men never willingly adopt any new law tending to change the constitution of the state, unless the necessity of the change is clearly demonstrated; and as such a necessity cannot make itself felt without being accompanied with danger, the republic may easily be destroyed before having perfected its constitution. That of Florence is a complete proof of this: reorganized after the revolt of Arezzo, in 1502, it was overthrown after the taking of Prato, in 1512.




16) The Institutes of the Christian Religion (1536)


Our wisdom, in so far as it ought to be deemed true and solid Wisdom, consists almost entirely of two parts: the knowledge of God and of ourselves. But as these are connected together by many ties, it is not easy to determine which of the two precedes and gives birth to the other. For, in the first place, no man can survey himself without forthwith turning his thoughts towards the God in whom he lives and moves; because it is perfectly obvious that the endowments which we possess cannot possibly be from ourselves; nay, that our very being is nothing else than subsistence in God alone. In the second place, those blessings which unceasingly distil to us from heaven, are like streams conducting us to the fountain. Here, again, the infinitude of good which resides in God becomes more apparent from our poverty. In particular, the miserable ruin into which the rebellion of the first man has plunged us, compels us to turn our eyes upwards; not only that while hungry and famishing we may thence ask what we want, but being aroused by fear may learn humility.




17) Euphues: The Anatomy of wit (1578)


There dwelt in Athens a young gentleman of great patrimony, and of so comely a personage, that it was doubted whether he were more bound to Nature for the lineaments of his person, or to Fortune for the increase of his possessions. But Nature impatient of comparisons, and as it were disdaining a companion or copartner in her working, added to this comeliness of his body such a sharp capacity of mind, that not only she proved Fortune counterfeit, but was half of that opinion that she herself was only current. This young gallant, of more with than wealth, and yet of more wealth than wisdom, seeing himself inferior to none in pleasant conceits, thought himself superior to all in honest conditions, insomuch that he deemed himself so apt to all things, that he gave himself almost to nothing, but practicing of those things commonly which are incident to these sharp wits, fine phrases, smooth quipping, merry taunting, using jesting without mean, and abusing mirth without measure. As therefore the sweetest rose hath his prickle, the finest velvet his brack, the fairest flower his bran, so the sharpest wit hath his wanton will, and the holiest head his wicked way. And true it is that some men write and most men believe, that in all perfect shapes, a blemish bringeth rather a liking every way to the eyes, than a loathing any way to the mind. Venus had her mole in her cheek which made her more amiable: Helen her scar on her chin which Paris called cos amoris, the whetstone of love.




18) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1496)


Oh unsurpassed generosity of God the Father, Oh wondrous and unsurpassable felicity of man, to whom it is granted to have what he chooses, to be what he wills to be! The brutes, from the moment of their birth, bring with them, as Lucilius says, “from their mother’s womb” all that they will ever possess. The highest spiritual beings were, from the very moment of creation, or soon thereafter, fixed in the mode of being which would be theirs through measureless eternities. But upon man, at the moment of his creation, God bestowed seeds pregnant with all possibilities, the germs of every form of life. Whichever of these a man shall cultivate, the same will mature and bear fruit in him. If vegetative, he will become a plant; if sensual, he will become brutish; if rational, he will reveal himself a heavenly being; if intellectual, he will be an angel and the son of God. And if, dissatisfied with the lot of all creatures, he should recollect himself into the center of his own unity, he will there become one spirit with God, in the solitary darkness of the Father, Who is set above all things, himself transcend all creatures.




19) The History of Tom Jones, a foundling (1749)


An author ought to consider himself, not as a gentleman who gives a private or eleemosynary treat, but rather as one who keeps a public ordinary, at which all persons are welcome for their money. In the former case, it is well known that the entertainer provides what fare he pleases; and though this should be very indifferent, and utterly disagreeable to the taste of his company, they must not find any fault; nay, on the contrary, good breeding forces them outwardly to approve and to commend whatever is set before them. Now the contrary of this happens to the master of an ordinary. Men who pay for what they eat will insist on gratifying their palates, however nice and whimsical these may prove; and if everything is not agreeable to their taste, will challenge a right to censure, to abuse, and to d—n their dinner without controul.


To prevent, therefore, giving offence to their customers by any such disappointment, it hath been usual with the honest and well-meaning host to provide a bill of fare which all persons may peruse at their first entrance into the house; and having thence acquainted themselves with the entertainment which they may expect, may either stay and regale with what is provided for them, or may depart to some other ordinary better accommodated to their taste.


As we do not disdain to borrow wit or wisdom from any man who is capable of lending us either, we have condescended to take a hint from these honest victuallers, and shall prefix not only a general bill of fare to our whole entertainment, but shall likewise give the reader particular bills to every course which is to be served up in this and the ensuing volumes.




20) The School of Abuse (1579)


Therefore as I cannot but commend his wisdom, which in banqueting feeds most upon that that doth nourish best, so must I dispraise his method in writing, which, following the course of amorous Poets, dwelleth longest in those points, that profit least and, like a wanton whelp [untrained hunting dog] leaveth the game to run riot.  The scarab flies over many a sweet flower and lightes in a cowsherd.  It is the custom of the fly to leave the sound places of the horse and suck at the botch; the nature of colloquintida, to draw the worst humors to itself; the manner of swine, to forsake the fair fields, and wallow in the mire.  And the whole practice of Poets, either with fables to show their abuses, or with plain terms to unfold their mischief, discover their shame, discredit themselves, and disperse their poison through all the world.  Virgil sweats in describing his Gnat: Ouid bestirreth him to paint out his Flea : the one shows his art in the lust of Dido, the other his cunning in the incest of Myrrha and [in] that trumpet of bawdry, the Craft of Love.
But if you look well to Epæus horse, you shall find in his bowels the destruction of Troy; open the sepulchre of Semiramis, whose title promiseth such wealth to the Kings of Persia, you shall see nothing but dead bones; rip up the golden ball that Nero consecrated to Jupiter Capitollinus, you shall have it stuffed with the shavings of his beard: pull off the visor that Poets mask in, you shall disclose their reproach, betray their vanity, loathe their wantonness, lament their folly, and perceive their sharp sayings to be placed as peerless in dunghills, fresh pictures on rotten walls, chaste matrons’ apparel on common courtesans.  These are the cups of Circe that turn reasonable creatures into brute beasts, the balls of Hippomenes, that hinder the course of Atalanta, and the blocks of the Devil that are cast in our ways to cut off the race of toward wits.  No marvel though Plato shut them out of his school and banished them quite from his commonwealth as effeminate writers, unprofitable members, and utter enemies to virtue.




21) The Consolation of Philosophy (524)


'Could I desert thee, child,' said she, 'and not lighten the burden which thou hast taken upon thee through the hatred of my name, by sharing this trouble? Even forgetting that it were not lawful for Philosophy to leave companionless the way of the innocent, should I, thinkest thou, fear to incur reproach, or shrink from it, as though some strange new thing had befallen? Thinkest thou that now, for the first time in an evil age, Wisdom hath been assailed by peril? Did I not often in days of old, before my servant Plato lived, wage stern warfare with the rashness of folly? In his lifetime, too, Socrates, his master, won with my aid the victory of an unjust death. And when, one after the other, the Epicurean herd, the Stoic, and the rest, each of them as far as in them lay, went about to seize the heritage he left, and were dragging me off protesting and resisting, as their booty, they tore in pieces the garment which I had woven with my own hands, and, clutching the torn pieces, went off, believing that the whole of me had passed into their possession. And some of them, because some traces of my vesture were seen upon them, were destroyed through the mistake of the lewd multitude, who falsely deemed them to be my disciples. It may be thou knowest not of the banishment of Anaxagoras, of the poison draught of Socrates, nor of Zeno's torturing, because these things happened in a distant country; yet mightest thou have learnt the fate of Arrius, of Seneca, of Soranus, whose stories are neither old nor unknown to fame. These men were brought to destruction for no other reason than that, settled as they were in my principles, their lives were a manifest contrast to the ways of the wicked. So there is nothing thou shouldst wonder at, if on the seas of this life we are tossed by storm-blasts, seeing that we have made it our chiefest aim to refuse compliance with evil-doers. 




22) Tamburlaine (1587)


MYCETES. Brother Cosroe, I find myself agriev'd;
     Yet insufficient to express the same,
     For it requires a great and thundering speech:
     Good brother, tell the cause unto my lords;
     I know you have a better wit than I.


     COSROE. Unhappy Persia,—that in former age
     Hast been the seat of mighty conquerors,
     That, in their prowess and their policies,
     Have triumph'd over Afric, and the bounds
     Of Europe where the sun dares scarce appear
     For freezing meteors and congealed cold,—
     Now to be rul'd and govern'd by a man
     At whose birth-day Cynthia with Saturn join'd,
     And Jove, the Sun, and Mercury denied
     To shed their influence in his fickle brain!
     Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at thee,
     Meaning to mangle all thy provinces.


     MYCETES. Brother, I see your meaning well enough,
     And through your planets I perceive you think
     I am not wise enough to be a king:
     But I refer me to my noblemen,
     That know my wit, and can be witnesses.
     I might command you to be slain for this,—
     Meander, might I not?


     MEANDER. Not for so small a fault, my sovereign lord.


     MYCETES. I mean it not, but yet I know I might.—
     Yet live; yea, live; Mycetes wills it so.—
     Meander, thou, my faithful counsellor,
     Declare the cause of my conceived grief,
     Which is, God knows, about that Tamburlaine,
     That, like a fox in midst of harvest-time,
     Doth prey upon my flocks of passengers;
     And, as I hear, doth mean to pull my plumes:
     Therefore 'tis good and meet for to be wise.




23) The Book named the Governor (1539)


PUBLIKE weale is in sondry wyse defined by philosophers, but knowyng by experience that the often repetition of anything of graue or sad importance wyll be tedious to the reders of this warke, who perchance for the more part haue nat ben trayned in lerning contaynynge semblable matter: I haue compiled one definition out of many, in as compendious fourme, as my poure witte can deuise: trustyng that in those fewe wordes the trewe signification of a publike weale shall euidently at) ere, to them whom reason can satisfie. A publik weale is a body lyuyng, compacte or made of sondry astates and degrees of men, whiche is disposed by the ordre of equite and gouerned by the rule and moderation of reason. In the latin tonge it is called Respublica, of the whiche the worde Res hath diuers significations, and dothe nat only betoken that, that is called a thynge, whiche is distincte from a persone, but also signifieth astate, condition, substance, and profite. In our olde vulgare, profite is called weale. And it is called a welthy contraye wherin is all thyng that is profitable. And he is a welthy man that is riche in money and substance. Publike (as Varro saith) is diriuied of people, whiche in latin is called Populus, wherfore hit semeth that men haue ben longe abused in calling Rempublieam a commune weale. And they which do suppose it so to be called for that, that euery thinge shulde be to all men in commune without discrepance of any astate or condition, be thereto moued nore by sensualite than by any good reason or inclination to humanite. And that shall sone appere unto them that wyll be satisfied either with autorite or with naturall ordre and example. Fyrst, the propre and trewe signification of the wordes publike and commune, whiche be borowed of the latin tonge for the insufficiencie of our owne langage, shal sufficiently declare the blyndenes of them whiche haue hitherto holden and maynteyned the sayde opinions. As I haue sayde, publike toke his begynnyng of people: whiche in latin is Populus, in whiche worde is conteyned all the inhabitantes of a realme or citie, of what astate condition so euer they be.




24) The Spanish Tragedy (1587)


VICE.  Then rest we heere a-while in our vnrest;
    And feede our sorrowes with inward sighes,
    For deepest cares break neuer into teares.
    But wherefore sit I in a regall throne?
    This better fits a wretches endles moane.
    Yet this is higher then my fortunes reach,
    And therefore better then my state deserues.


                  Falles to the grounde.


    I, I, this earth, image of melancholly,
    Seeks him whome fates [adiudge] to miserie!
    Heere let me lye!  Now am I at the lowest!
    Qui iacet in terra non habet vnde cadat.
    In me concumpsit vires fortuna nocendo,
    Nil superest vt iam possit obesse magis.
    Yes, Fortune may bereaue me of my crowne—
    Heere, take it now; let Fortune doe her worst,
    She shall now rob me of this sable weed.
    O, no, she enuies none but pleasent things.
    Such is the folly of despightfull chance,
    Fortune is blinde and sees not my deserts,
    So is she deafe and heares not my laments;
    And, coulde she heare, yet is she willfull mad,
    And therefore will not pittie my distresse.
    Suppose that she coulde pittie me, what then?
    What helpe can be expected at her hands
    Whose foote is standing on a rowling stone
    And minde more mutable then fickle windes?
    Why waile I, then, wheres hope of no redresse?
    O, yes, complaining makes my greefe seeme lesse.
    My late ambition hath distaind my faith,
    My breach of faith occaisioned bloudie warres,
    Those bloudie warres haue spent my treasur[i]e,
    And with my treasur[i]e my peoples blood,
    And with the blood my ioy and best beloued,—
    My best beloued, my sweet and onely sonne!
    O, wherefore went I not to warre my-selfe?
    The cause was mine; I might haue died for both.
    My yeeres were mellow, but his young and greene:
    My death were naturall, but his was forced.




25) The Advancement of Learning (1605)


Wherefore, representing your Majesty many times unto my mind, and beholding you not with the inquisitive eye of presumption, to discover that which the Scripture telleth me is inscrutable, but with the observant eye of duty and admiration; leaving aside the other parts of your virtue and fortune, I have been touched, yea, and possessed with an extreme wonder at those your virtues and faculties, which the Philosophers call intellectual; the largeness of your capacity, the faithfulness of your memory, the swiftness of your apprehension, the penetration of your judgement, and the facility and order of your elocution: and I have often thought, that of all the persons living that I have known, your Majesty were the best instance to make a man of Plato's opinion, that all knowledge is but remembrance, and that the mind of man by nature knoweth all things, and hath but her own native and original notions (which by the strangeness and darkness of this tabernacle of the body are sequestered) again revived and restored: such a light of nature I have observed in your Majesty, and such a readiness to take and blaze from the least occasion presented, or the least spark of another's knowledge delivered. And as the Scripture saith of the wisest king, "That his heart was as the sands of the sea"; which though it be one of the largest bodies, yet it consisteth of the smallest and dunest portions; so hath God given your Majesty a composition of understanding admirable, being able to compass and comprehend the greatest matters, and nevertheless to touch and apprehend the least; whereas it should seem an impossibility in nature, for the same instrument to make itself ïfor great and small works. And for your gift of speech, I call to mind what Cornelius Tacitus saith of Augustus Caesar: "Augusto proïfuens, et quae principem deceret, eloquentia fuit." For if we note it well, speech that is uttered with labour and diffculty, or speech that savoureth of the affectation of art and precepts, or speech that is framed after the imitation of some pattern of eloquence, though never so excellent; all this hath somewhat servile, and holding of the subject.




26) The Massacre at Paris (1593)


GUISE. Now Guise, begin those deepe ingendred thoughts
   To burst abroad, those never dying flames,
   Which cannot be extinguisht but by bloud.
   Oft have I leveld, and at last have learnd,
   That perill is the cheefest way to happines,
   And resolution honors fairest aime.
   What glory is there in a common good,
   That hanges for every peasant to atchive?
   That like I best that flyes beyond my reach.
   Set me to scale the high Peramides,
   And thereon set the Diadem of Fraunce,
   Ile either rend it with my nayles to naught,
   Or mount the top with my aspiring winges,
   Although my downfall be the deepest hell.
   For this, I wake, when others think I sleepe,
   For this, I waite, that scorn attendance else:
   For this, my quenchles thirst whereon I builde,
   Hath often pleaded kindred to the King.
   For this, this head, this heart, this hand and sworde,
   Contrive, imagine and fully execute
   Matters of importe, aimed at by many,
   Yet understoode by none.
   For this, hath heaven engendred me of earth,
   For this, the earth sustaines my bodies weight,
   And with this wait Ile counterpoise a Crowne,
   Or with seditions weary all the worlde:
   For this, from Spaine the stately Catholic
   Sends Indian golde to coyne me French ecues:
   For this have I a largesse from the Pope,
   A pension and a dispensation too:
   And by that priviledge to worke upon,
   My policye hath framde religion.
   Religion: O Diabole.
   Fye, I am ashamde, how ever that I seeme,
   To think a word of such a simple sound,
   Of so great matter should be made the ground.
   The gentle King whose pleasure uncontrolde,
   Weakneth his body, and will waste his Realme,
   If I repaire not what he ruinates:
   Him as a childe I dayly winne with words,
   So that for proofe, he barely beares the name:
   I execute, and he sustaines the blame.
   The Mother Queene workes wonders for my sake,
   And in my love entombes the hope of Fraunce:
   Rifling the bowels of her treasurie,
   To supply my wants and necessitie.
   Paris hath full five hundred Colledges,
   As Monestaries, Priories, Abbyes and halles,
   Wherein are thirtie thousand able men,
   Besides a thousand sturdy student Catholicks,
   And more: of my knowledge in one cloyster keep,
   Five hundred fatte Franciscan Fryers and priestes.
   All this and more, if more may be comprisde,
   To bring the will of our desires to end.
   


27) The Compleat Angler (1653)


But if this relation of Gesners bee dis-believed, it is too evident to bee doubted that a Pike will devoure a fish of his own kind, that shall be bigger then this belly or throat will receive; and swallow a part of him, and let the other part remaine in his mouth till the swallowed part be digested, and then swallow that other part that was in his mouth, and so put it over by degrees. And it is observed, that the Pike will eat venemous things (as some kind of Frogs are) and yet live without being harmed by them: for, as some say, he has in him a natural Balsome or Antidote against all Poison: and others, that he never eats a venemous Frog till he hath first killed her, and then (as Ducks are observed to do to Frogs in Spawning time, at which time some Frogs are observed to be venemous) so throughly washt her, by tumbling her up and down in the water, that he may devour her without danger. And Gesner affirms, that a Polonian Gentleman did faithfully assure him, he had seen two young Geese at one time in the belly of a Pike: and hee observes, that in Spain there is no Pikes, and that the biggest are in the Lake Thracimane in Italy, and the next, if not equal to them, are the Pikes of England.
The Pike is also observed to be a melancholly, and a bold fish: Melancholly, because he alwaies swims or rests himselfe alone, and never swims in sholes, or with company, as Roach, and Dace, and most other fish do: And bold, because he fears not a shadow, or to see or be seen of any body, as the Trout and Chub, and all other fish do.
And it is observed by Gesner, that the bones, and hearts, & gals of Pikes are very medicinable for several Diseases, as to stop bloud, to abate Fevers, to cure Agues, to oppose or expel the infection of the Plague, and to be many wayes medicinable and useful for the good of mankind; but that the biting of a Pike is venemous and hard to be cured.




28) The Heroic Enthusiasts (1585)


Thou knowest that, as the Platonic ideas are divided into three species, of which one tends to the contemplative or speculative life, one to active morality, and the third to the idle and voluptuous, so are there three species of love, of which one raises itself from the contemplation of bodily form to the consideration of the spiritual and divine; the other only continues in the delight of seeing and conversing; the third from seeing proceeds to precipitate into the concupiscence of touch. Of these three modes others are composed, according as the first may be coupled with the second or the third, or as all the three modes may combine together, of which one and all may be divided into others, according to the affections of the enthusiast, as these tend more towards the spiritual object, or more towards the corporeal, or equally towards the one and the other. Hence it comes, that of those who find themselves in this warfare, and are entangled in the meshes of love, some aim at enjoying, and they are incited to pluck the apple from the tree of corporeal beauty, without which acquisition, or at least the hope of it, they hold vain and worthy only of derision every amorous care; and in such-wise run all those who are of a barbarous nature, who neither do nor can seek to exalt themselves by loving worthy things, and aspiring to illustrious things, and higher still to things divine, by suitable studies and exercises, to which nothing can more richly and easily supply the wings than heroic love; others put before themselves the fruit of delight, which they take in the aspect of the beauty and grace of the spirit, which glitters and shines in the beauty of the body, and certain of these, although they love the body and greatly desire to be united to it, bewailing its absence and being afflicted by separation, at the same time fear, lest presuming in this they may be deprived of that affability, conversation, friendship, and sympathy which are most precious to them; because to attempt this there cannot be more guarantee of success than there is risk of forfeiting that favour, which appears before the eyes of thought as a thing so glorious and worthy.




29) The Roaring Girl (1611)


Sweet maid, let’s lose no time, ’tis in heaven’s book Set down, that I must have thee: an oath we took, To keep our vows, but when the knight your father Was from mine parted, storms began to sit Upon my covetous father’s brow: which fell From them on me, he reckoned up what gold This marriage would draw from him, at which he swore, To lose so much blood, could not grieve him more. He then dissuades me from thee, called thee not fair, And asked what is she, but a beggar’s heir? He scorned thy dowry of five thousand Marks. If such a sum of money could be found, And I would match with that, he’d not undo it, Provided his bags might add nothing to it, But vowed, if I took thee, nay more, did swear it, Save birth from him I nothing should inherit




30) The Last Days of Pompeii (1879)


THE sun shone gaily into that beautiful chamber in the house of Glaucus, which I have before said is now called the 'Room of Leda'. The morning rays entered through rows of small casements at the higher part of the room, and through the door which opened on the garden, that answered to the inhabitants of the southern cities the same purpose that a greenhouse or conservatory does to us. The size of the garden did not adapt it for exercise, but the various and fragrant plants with which it was filled gave a luxury to that indolence so dear to the dwellers in a sunny clime. And now the odorous, fanned by a gentle wind creeping from the adjacent sea, scattered themselves over that chamber, whose walls vied with the richest colors of the most glowing flowers. Besides the gem of the room—the painting of Leda and Tyndarus—in the centre of each compartment of the walls were set other pictures of exquisite beauty. In one you saw Cupid leaning on the knees of Venus; in another Ariadne sleeping on the beach, unconscious of the perfidy of Theseus. Merrily the sunbeams played to and fro on the tessellated floor and the brilliant walls—far more happily came the rays of joy to the heart of the young Glaucus.




31) Henry IV, Part 1 (1597)


So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
To be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood;
Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,
Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs
Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
All of one nature, of one substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock
And furious close of civil butchery
Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
March all one way and be no more opposed
Against acquaintance, kindred and allies:
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,
Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy;
Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb
To chase these pagans in those holy fields
Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd
For our advantage on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go:
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
What yesternight our council did decree
In forwarding this dear expedience.




32) The Bishop’s Bible (1568)




And it came to passe, that when Iesus had finished these sayinges, he gat hym from Galilee, and came into the coastes of Iurie, beyonde Iordane:


And great multitudes folowed hym: and he healed them there.
The pharisees also came vnto hym, temptyng hym, and saying vnto hym: Is it lawfull for a man to put away his wyfe, for euery cause?
He aunswered and sayde vnto them: Haue ye not read, that he which created at the begynnyng, made them male and female,
And sayde: For this cause, shall a man leaue father and mother, and shall be knit to his wyfe: and they twayne shall be one fleshe.
Wherfore, they are no more twayne, but one fleshe. Let not man therefore put a sunder, that which God hath coupled together.
They say vnto hym: why did Moyses then commaunde to geue a writyng of diuorcement, and to put her away?
He sayde vnto them: Moyses, because of the hardnes of your heartes, suffred you to put away your wyues: But from the begynnyng it was not so.
I say vnto you: whosoeuer putteth away his wyfe, except it be for fornication, and maryeth another, committeth adulterie: And who so maryeth her which is diuorced, doth comit adulterie.
His disciples say vnto hym: If the matter be so betwene man and wyfe, [then] is it not good to mary.
He sayde vnto them: all men can not receaue this saying, saue they to whom it is geuen. 
For there are some chaste, which are so borne, out of their mothers wombe: And there are some chaste, which be made chaste of me: And there be chaste, which haue made themselues chaste, for the kyngdome of heauens sake. He that is able to receaue [it], let him receaue [it].
	



33) The Lusaids (poem) (1572)


O Sun, couldst thou so foul a crime behold,
Nor veil thine head in darkness, as of old
A sudden night unwonted horror cast
O'er that dire banquet, where the sire's repast
The son's torn limbs supplied!—Yet you, ye vales!
Ye distant forests, and ye flow'ry dales!
When pale and sinking to the dreadful fall,
You heard her quiv'ring lips on Pedro call;
Your faithful echoes caught the parting sound,
And Pedro! Pedro! mournful, sigh'd around.
Nor less the wood-nymphs of Mondego's groves
Bewail'd the memory of her hapless loves:
Her griefs they wept, and, to a plaintive rill
Transform'd their tears, which weeps and murmurs still.
To give immortal pity to her woe
They taught the riv'let through her bowers to flow,
And still, through violet-beds, the fountain pours
Its plaintive wailing, and is named Amours.
Nor long her blood for vengeance cried in vain:
Her gallant lord begins his awful reign,
In vain her murd'rers for refuge fly,
Spain's wildest hills no place of rest supply.
The injur'd lover's and the monarch's ire,
And stern-brow'd Justice in their doom conspire:
In hissing flames they die, and yield their souls in fire.




34) The Triumphs of Pertrarch (1351)


Oh! if to you were known
That beauty which I sing, immense, divine.
As unto him on whom its glories shine!
The heart had then o'erflown
With joy unbounded, such as is denied
Unto that nature which its acts doth guide.
How happy is the soul for you that sighs,
Celestial lights! which lend a charm to life,
And make me bless what else I should not prize!
Ah! why, so seldom why
Afford what ne'er can cause satiety?
More often to your sight
Why not bring Love, who holds me constant strife?
And why so soon of joys despoil me quite,
Which ever and anon my tranced soul delight?
Yes, 'debted to your grace,
Frequent I feel throughout my inmost soul
Unwonted floods of sweetest rapture roll;
Relieving so the mind,
That all oppressive thoughts are left behind,
And of a thousand only one has place;
For which alone this life is dear to me.
Oh! might the blessing of duration prove,
Not equall'd then could my condition be!
But this would, haply, move
In others envy, in myself vain pride.
That pain should be allied
To pleasure is, alas! decreed above;
Then, stifling all the ardour of desire,
Homeward I turn my thoughts, and in myself retire.




35) The Book of Common Prayer (1549)


For Sleep O heavenly Father, you give your children sleep for the refreshing of soul and body: Grant me this gift, I pray; keep me in that perfect peace which you have promised to those whose minds are fixed on you; and give me such a sense of your presence, that in the hours of silence I may enjoy the blessed assurance of your love; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.   In the Morning This is another day, O Lord. I know not what it will bring forth, but make me ready, Lord, for whatever it may be. If I am to stand up, help me to stand bravely. If I am to sit still, help me to sit quietly. If I am to lie low, help me to do it patiently. And if I am to do nothing, let me do it gallantly. Make these words more than words, and give me the Spirit of Jesus.




36) The Canterbury Tales (1392)


And everemoore he hadde a sovereyn prys;
And though that he were worthy, he was wys,
And of his port as meeke as is a mayde.      
He nevere yet no vileynye ne sayde      
In al his lyf unto no maner wight.      
He was a verray, parfit gentil knyght.      
But, for to tellen yow of his array,      
His hors were goode, but he was nat gay.      
Of fustian he wered a gypon      
Al bismotered with his habergeon,      
For he was late ycome from his viage,      
And wente for to doon his pilgrymage.      
With hym ther was his sone, a yong squier,      
A lovyere and a lusty bacheler,      
With lokkes crulle as they were leyd in presse.      
Of twenty yeer of age he was, I gesse.      
Of his stature he was of evene lengthe,      
And wonderly delyvere, and of greet strengthe.      
And he hadde been somtyme in chyvachie
In flaundres, in artoys, and pycardie,
And born hym weel, as of so litel space,
In hope to stonden in his lady grace. 




37) Tottel’s Miscellany (1557)


Speake thou and spede where
Stond who so list vpon the .
Sudb is the course, that natures 
Such vain thought, as wonted 
Suffised not (madame) that . 
Syghes are my foode : my . 
Synce loue wyll nedes, that I 
Tagus farewel that westward 
They flee from me, that 
Through out the world if it . 
The answere that ye made 
The enmy of life, decayer of 
The flaming sighes that boyle 
The furious goonne, in his . 
The liuely sparkes, that issue 
The longe loue, that in my 
The piller pcrisht is whereto 
The restful! place, renewer of 
The wandring gadling, in the  
Vnstable dreame, accordyng  
Vnwarely so was neuer no . 
Venemous thomes that are so 
Vulcane begat me : Minerua 
Was neuer file yet half so well 
What man hath hard such 
What nedes these threatnyng  
What rage is this t what . 
Whatvaileth troth? or byit, 
What word is that, that . 
When Dido feasted first the 
When first mine eyes did view. 
Where shall I haue, at myne 
Within my brest I neuer 




38) The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus (1592)


My heart is harden'd, I cannot repent;
Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven:
Swords, poisons, halters, and envenom'd steel
Are laid before me to despatch myself;
And long ere this I  should have done the deed,
Had not sweet pleasure conquer'd deep despair.
Have not I made blind Homer sing to me
Of Alexander's love and Oenon's death?
And hath not he, that built the walls of Thebes
With ravishing sound of his melodious harp,
Made music with my Mephistophilis?
Why should I die, then, or basely despair?
I am resolv'd; Faustus shall not repent.—
Come, Mephistophilis, let us dispute again,
And reason of divine astrology.
Speak, are there many spheres above the moon?
Are all celestial bodies but one globe,
As is the substance of this centric earth?




39) The Actes and Monuments (1563)


And thus, having brought Bishop Bonner home to his own house, there to leave him awhile, to take his ease in his own lodging till we return to him again, we will, in the mean time, make a little intercourse into Cornwall and Devonshire, to discourse some part of the disordered and disloyal doings of those men against their so meek and excellent a prince, having no cause ministered thereunto; yea, having cause rather to yield praise and thanks to the Lord for such a quiet and peaceable prince in his mercy given unto them. But such is the condition of unquiet natures, that they cannot skill of peace: and where due discretion lacketh, there lewd disposed persons cannot tell when they be well. Again, some be so crooked and so perversely given, that the more courteously they be treated, the worse they are; and when, by honest diligence, they list not to get their living, by public disturbance of commonwealths they think to thrive. And so seemed it to fare with this seditious people of Cornwall and Devonshire, who, having so good and virtuous a king, that if they should have sought him, as Diogenes, they say, did seek for a man with a candle, a meeker and better sovereign they could not have found, a crueller they well deserved; yet were they not with him contented, but, contrary to all order, reason, nature, and loyalty, advanced themselves in a rebellious conspiracy against him, and against his proceedings, through the pernicious instigation, first (as it seemeth) of certain popish priests, who, grudging and disdaining against the injunctions and godly order of reformation set forward by the king, and especially mourning to see their old popish Church of Rome to decay, ceased not, by all sinister and subtle means, first under God's name and the king's, and under colour of religion, to persuade the people; then, to gather sides, to assemble in companies, and to gather captains; and at last to burst out in rank rebellion.




40) The Comedy of Errors (1590)




I am not partial to infringe our laws;
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives,
Have sealed his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threat'ning looks,
For, since the mortal and intestine jars
'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
It hath in solemn synods been decreed,
Both by the Syracusans and ourselves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns.
Nay, more: if any born at Ephesus
Be seen at any Syracusan marts and fairs,
Again, if any Syracusan born
Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies:
His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levièd
To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks,
Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.




41) As You Like It (1599)


Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. I'll tell thee, Charles, it is the stubbornest young fellow of France, full of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me his natural brother: therefore use thy discretion. I had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger. And thou wert best look to't; for if thou dost him any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace himself on thee, he will practise against thee by poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other, for I assure thee, and almost with tears I speak it, there is not one so young and so villainous this day living. I speak but brotherly of him, but should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must blush and weep and thou must look pale and wonder.




42) Othello (1603)


Despise me
If I do not. Three great ones of the city,
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capped to him, and by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place:
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Evades them with a bombast circumstance
Horribly stuffed with epithets of war,
Nonsuits my mediators. For 'Certes', says he,
'I have already chose my officer.'
And what was he?
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine -
A fellow almost damned in a fair wife -
That never set a squadron in the field
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster, unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the toga'd consuls can propose
As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th'election;
And I - of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus and on others' grounds,
Christened and heathen - must be beleed and calmed
By debitor and creditor: this counter-caster,
He - in good time - must his lieutenant be,
And I - bless the mark! - his Moorship's ancient.




43) The Taming of the Shrew (1590)


Even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up and manage well the jest:
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures:
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet:
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound;
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
And with a low submissive reverence
Say 'What is it your honour will command?'
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrew'd with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say 'Will't please your lordship cool your hands?'
Some one be ready with a costly suit
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease:
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic;
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do and do it kindly, gentle sirs:
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.




44) The Merchant of Venice (1596)


Let me play the fool.
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my liver rather heat with wine
Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within
Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes? And creep into the jaundice
By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio
(I love thee, and ’tis my love that speaks):
There are a sort of men whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond
And do a willful stillness entertain
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say “I am Sir Oracle,
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark.”
O my Antonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise
For saying nothing, when, I am very sure,
If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
Which, hearing them, would call their brothers
fools.
I’ll tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.—
Come, good Lorenzo.—Fare you well a while.
I’ll end my exhortation after dinner.




45) The Return from Parnassus (1602)


Take  it  on  the  word  of  a  gentleman,  thou  cannot 
have  it  a  penny  under,  think  on't,  think  on  't,  while  I 
meditate  on  my  fair  mistress. 
Nunc  seqiior  imperiimi  magne  Cupido  tuum. 
What  ere  become  of  this  dull  threadbare  clerk, 
I  must  be  costly  in  my  mistress'  eye ; 
Ladies  regard  not  ragged  company. 
I  will  with  the  revenues  of  my  chaffered  church, 
First  buy  an  ambling  hobby  for  my  fair  ; 
Whose  measured  pace  may  teach  the  world  to  dance 
Proud  of  his  burden  when  he  'gins  to  prance  :         
Then  must  I  buy  a  jewel  for  her  ear, 
A  kirtle  of  some  hundred  crowns  or  more  : 
With  these  fair  gifts  when  I  accompanied  go, 
She'll  give  Jove's  breakfast ;  Sidney  terms  it  so. 
I  am  her  needle,  she  is  my  Adamant, 
She  is  my  fair  rose,  I  her  unworthy  prick.




46) The Unfortunate Traveler (1594)


Ingenvovs honorable Lord, I know not what blinde custome methodicall antiquity hath thrust vpon vs, to dedicate such books as we publish, to one great man or other; In which respect, least anie man should challenge these my papers as goods vncustomd, and so, extend vpon them as forfeite to contempt, to the seale of your excellent censure loe here I present them to bee seene and allowed. Prize them as high or as low as you list: if you set anie price on them, I hold my labor well satisfide. Long haue I desired to approoue my wit vnto you. My reuerent duetifull thoughts (euen from their infancie) haue been retayners to your glorie. Now at last I haue enforst an opportunitie to plead my deuoted minde. All that in this phantasticall Treatise I can promise, is some reasonable conueyance of historie, & varietie of mirth. By diuers of my good frends haue I been dealt with to employ my dul pen in this kinde, it being a cleane different vaine from other my former courses of writing. How wel or ill I haue done in it, I am ignorant: (the eye that sees roundabout it selfe, sees not into it selfe): only your Honours applauding encouragement hath power to make mee arrogant. Incomprehensible is the heigth of your spirit both in heroical resolution and matters of conceit. Vnrepriueably perisheth that booke whatsoeuer to wast paper, which on the diamond rocke of your iudgement disasterly chanceth to be shipwrackt. A dere louer and cherisher you are, as well of the louers of Poets, as of Poets themselues. Amongst their sacred number I dare not ascribe my selfe, though now and then I speak English: that smal braine I haue, to no further vse I conuert, saue to be kinde to my frends, and fatall to my enemies. A new brain, a new wit, a new stile, a new soule will I get mee, to canonize your name to posteritie, if in this my first attempt I be not taxed of presumption. Of your gracious fauor I despaire not, for I am not altogether Fames outcast. This handfull of leaues I offer to your view, to the leaues on trees I compare, which as they cannot grow of themselues except they haue some branches or boughes to cleaue too, & with whose iuice and sap they be euermore recreated & nourisht: so except these vnpolisht leaues of mine haue some braunch of Nobilitie whereon to depend and cleaue, and with the vigorous nutriment of whose authorized commendation they may be continually fosterd and refresht, neuer wil they grow to the worlds good liking, but forthwith fade and die on the first houre of their birth. Your Lordship is the large spreading branch of renown, from whence these my idle leaues seeke to deriue their whole nourishing: it resteth you either scornfully shake them off, as wormeaten & worthies, or in pity preserue them and cherish them, for some litle summer frute you hope to finde amongst them.






47) The Tragedy of Mariam (1613)


How oft have I with publike voyce runne on?
To censure Romes last Hero for deceit:
Because he wept when Pompeis life was gone,
Yet when he liv'd, hee thought his Name too great.
But now I doe recant, and Roman Lord
Excuse too rash a judgement in a woman:
My Sexe pleads pardon, pardon then afford,
Mistaking is with us, but too too common.
Now doe I finde by selfe Experience taught,
One Object yeelds both griefe and joy:
You wept indeed, when on his worth you thought,
But joyd that slaughter did your Foe destroy.
So at his death your Eyes true droppes did raine,
Whom dead, you did not wish alive againe.
When Herod liv'd, that now is done to death,
Oft have I wisht that I from him were free:
Oft have I wisht that he might lose his breath,
Oft have I wisht his Carkas dead to see.
Then Rage and Scorne had put my love to flight,
That Love which once on him was firmely set:
Hate hid his true affection from my sight,
And kept my heart from paying him his debt.
And blame me not, for Herods Jealousie
Had power even constancie itselfe to change:
For hee by barring me from libertie,
To shunne my ranging, taught me first to range.
But yet too chast a Scholler was my hart,
To learn to love another then my Lord:
To leave his Love, my lessons former part,




48) The Castle of Perseverance (1500)


After our forefathers' kind,
This night I was of my mother born.
From my mother I walk, I wend.
Full faint and feeble I fare you beforn.
I am naked of limb and lend,            lend = loin
As all mankind is shapèd and shorn.
I know not how 'twere best I fared,
Nor what to do at noon or morn,
For shame I stopped and stared.
I was born this night in bloody blee,        blee = hue
And naked I am, as ye may see.
Ah, Lord God in Trinity,
Mankind is ill-prepared!   (TWO ANGELS enter.)


Two angels been assigned to me,
The one teacheth me the good;
On my right side ye may [her] see,           (I changed the word from "him" to "her" since our good angel is a woman, Helena.)
She came from Christ that died on rood.        rood = Jesus' cross
Another is ordainèd here to be,
That is my foe by fen and flood.
He goes about in every degree
To drag me to those devils wood           wood = enraged, insane
That are thick in the evil dell.
Such two hath every man alive,
To rule over him and his wits five.
When man does evil, the one would shrive,     shrive = hear his confession (and absolve him)
T'other drags him to hell.                         wycke = wicked, wickedness


But since these angels to me befall,
Lord Jesu! of you I beg a boon:
That I may follow, by street and stall,        by street and stall = everywhere and always
The angel that came from heaven's throne.
Now, Lord Jesu, in heaven's hall
Hear when I make my moan.
Caring Christ, to you I call!
Like a grisly ghost, I grieve and groan,
And ponder, right full of thought.
Ah, Lord Jesu! Whither may I go?
A christening-cloth I have and no moe.           I do not know whether crysme is the name of the ritual or the baby's garment.
Alas! men may be wonder woe,
When they be first forth brought.   (Lines 275-326)






49) The Revenger’s Tragedy (1607)


“Faith, if the truth were known, I was begot
After some gluttonous dinner; some stirring dish
Was my first father. When deep healths went round,
And ladies' cheeks were painted red with wine,
Their tongues as short and nimble as their heels,
Uttering words sweet and thick, and when they rose
Were marrily disposed to fall again:
Oh, damnation met
The sin of feasts, drunken adultery!
I feel it swell me; my revenge is just:
I was begot in impudent wine and lust
(...)
As for my brother, the duke's only son,
Whose birth is more beholding to report
Than mine, and yet perhaps as falsely sown,
I'll loose my days upon him, hate all I.”




50) Euphues and his England (1580)


Isedome is great wealth. Sparing, is good getting. Thrift consisteth not in golde, but grace. It is better to dye with-out mony, then to liue with out modestie. Put no more clothes on thy back, then will expell colde: neither any more meat in thy belly, then may quench hunger. Use not chaunge in attire, nor varietie in thy-dyet: the one bringeth pride, the other surfets. Each vaine, voyd of pietie: both costly, wide of profit.
    Goe to bed with the Lambe, & rise with the Larke: Late watching in the night, breedeth vnquyet: & long sleeping in the day, vngodlinesse: Flye both: this, as vnwholsome: that, as vnhonest.
    Enter not into bands, no not for thy best friends: he that payeth another mans debt seeketh his own decay, it is as rare to see a rich Surety as a black Swan, and he that lendeth to all that will borowe, sheweth great good will, but lyttle witte. Lende not a penny without pawne, for that will be a good gage to borowe. Be not hastie to marry, it is better to haue one plough going, then two cradells: and more profit to haue a barne filled then a bedde. But if thou canst not liue chastly, chuse such an one, as maye be more commended for humilitie, then beautie. A good huswife, is a great patrimony: and she is most honourable, that is most honest. If thou desire to be olde, beware of too much wine: If to be healthy, take heede of many women: If too be rich, shunne playing at al games. Long quaffing, maketh a short lyfe: Fonde lust, causeth drye bones: and lewd pastimes, naked pursses. Let the Cooke be thy Phisition, and the shambles thy Apothecaries shop: He that for euery qualme wil take a Receipt, and can-not make two meales, vnlesse Galen be his Gods good: shall be sure to make the Phisition rich, and himselfe a begger: his bodye will neuer be with-out diseases, and his pursse euer with-out money.
    Be not too lauish in giuing almes, the charitie of this Countrey, is, God helpe thee: and the courtesie, I haue the best wine in towne for you.
    Liue in the Countrey, not in the Court: where neither Grasse will growe, nor Mosse cleaue to thy heeles.






51) The First Folio (1623)


 I pray thee marke me:
I thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To closenes, and the bettering of my mind
with that, which but by being so retir'd
Ore-priz'd all popular rate: in my false brother
Awak'd an euill nature, and my trust
Like a good parent, did beget of him
A falsehood in it's contrarie, as great
As my trust was, which had indeede no limit,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus Lorded,
Not onely with what my reuenew yeelded,
But what my power might els exact. Like one
Who hauing into truth, by telling of it,
Made such a synner of his memorie
To credite his owne lie, he did beleeue
He was indeed the Duke, out o'th' Substitution
And executing th' outward face of Roialtie
With all prerogatiue: hence his Ambition growing:
Do'st thou heare ?




52) Paradise Lost (1667)


Stand still in bright array, ye Saints; here stand,
Ye Angels armed; this day from battle rest:
Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearless in his righteous cause;
And as ye have received, so have ye done,
Invincibly: But of this cursed crew
The punishment to other hand belongs;
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints:
Number to this day's work is not ordained,
Nor multitude; stand only, and behold                                   
God's indignation on these godless poured
By me; not you, but me, they have despised,
Yet envied; against me is all their rage,
Because the Father, to whom in Heaven supreme
Kingdom, and power, and glory appertains,
Hath honoured me, according to his will.
Therefore to me their doom he hath assigned;
That they may have their wish, to try with me
In battle which the stronger proves; they all,
Or I alone against them; since by strength                            
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excels;
Nor other strife with them do I vouchsafe.
  So spake the Son, and into terrour changed
His countenance too severe to be beheld,
And full of wrath bent on his enemies.
At once the Four spread out their starry wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs
Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound
Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host.                              
He on his impious foes right onward drove,
Gloomy as night; under his burning wheels
The stedfast empyrean shook throughout,
All but the throne itself of God. Full soon
Among them he arrived; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in their souls infixed
Plagues: They, astonished, all resistance lost,
All courage; down their idle weapons dropt:
O'er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode                       
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,
That wished the mountains now might be again
Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visaged Four
Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes;
One Spirit in them ruled; and every eye
Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire
Among the accursed, that withered all their strength,                   
And of their wonted vigour left them drained,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked
His thunder in mid volley; for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven:
The overthrown he raised, and as a herd
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged
Drove them before him thunder-struck, pursued
With terrours, and with furies, to the bounds
And crystal wall of Heaven; which, opening wide,                        
Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed
Into the wasteful deep: The monstrous sight
Struck them with horrour backward, but far worse
Urged them behind: Headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.






53) Leviathan (1651)


And as to the faculties of the mind, setting aside the arts grounded upon words, and especially that skill of proceeding upon general and infallible rules, called science, which very few have and but in few things, as being not a native faculty born with us, nor attained, as prudence, while we look after somewhat else, I find yet a greater equality amongst men than that of strength. For prudence is but experience, which equal time equally bestows on all men in those things they equally apply themselves unto. That which may perhaps make such equality incredible is but a vain conceit of one's own wisdom, which almost all men think they have in a greater degree than the vulgar; that is, than all men but themselves, and a few others, whom by fame, or for concurring with themselves, they approve. For such is the nature of men that howsoever they may acknowledge many others to be more witty, or more eloquent or more learned, yet they will hardly believe there be many so wise as themselves; for they see their own wit at hand, and other men's at a distance. But this proveth rather that men are in that point equal, than unequal. For there is not ordinarily a greater sign of the equal distribution of anything than that every man is contented with his share.




54) The Pilgrim’s Progress (1678)


  Neither could they, with all the skill they had, get again to the stile that night. Wherefore at last, lighting under a little shelter, they sat down there till the day brake; but being weary, they fell asleep. Now there was, not far from the place where they lay, a castle, called Doubting Castle, the owner whereof was Giant Despair, and it was in his grounds they now were sleeping: wherefore he, getting up in the morning early, and walking up and down in his fields, caught Christian and Hopeful asleep in his grounds. Then with a grim and surly voice, he bid them awake, and asked them whence they were, and what they did in his grounds. They told him they were pilgrims, and that they had lost their way. Then said the giant, You have this night trespassed on me by trampling in and lying on my grounds, and therefore you must go along with me. So they were forced to go, because he was stronger than they. They also had but little to say, for they knew themselves in a fault. The giant, therefore, drove them before him, and put them into his castle, into a very dark dungeon, nasty and stinking to the spirits of these two men. Here, then, they lay from Wednesday morning till Saturday night, without one bit of bread, or drop of drink, or light, or any to ask how they did; they were, therefore, here in evil case, and were far from friends and acquaintance. Psa. 88:18. Now in this place Christian had double sorrow, because it was through his unadvised counsel that they were brought into this distress.






55) The Canterbury Tales (1600)


But now, sire,—lat me se—what I shal seyn?
A ha! by God, I have my tale ageyn.
     Whan that my fourthe housbonde was on beere,
I weep algate, and made sory cheere,
As wyves mooten, for it is usage,
And with my coverchief covered my visage;
But for that I was purveyed of a make,
I wepte but smal, and that I undertake!
     To chirche was myn housbonde born a morwe
With neighebores, that for hym maden sorwe,
And Jankyn, oure clerk, was oon of tho.
As help me God, whan that I saugh hym go
After the beere, me thoughte he hadde a paire
Of legges and of feet so clene and faire
That al myn herte I gaf unto his hoold.
He was, I trowe, a twenty wynter oold,
And I was fourty, if I shal seye sooth;
But yet I hadde alwey a coltes tooth.
Gat-tothed I was, and that bicam me weel,
I hadde the prente of seïnte Venus seel.
As help me God, I was a lusty oon,
And faire and riche, and yong, and wel bigon,
And trewely, as myne housbondes tolde me,
I hadde the beste quonyam myghte be.
For certes, I am al Venerien
In feelynge, and myn herte is Marcien;
Venus me gaf my lust, my likerousnesse,
And Mars gaf me my sturdy hardynesse.
Myn áscendent was Taur, and Mars therinne;
Allas, allas! that evere love was synne!
I folwed ay myn inclinacioun
By vertu of my constellacioun,
That made me I koude noght withdrawe
My chambre of Venus from a good felawe.
Yet have I Martes mark upon my face,
And also in another, privee, place.
For God so wys be my savacioun,
I ne loved nevere by no discrecioun,
But evere folwede myn appetit,—
Al were he short, or long, or blak, or whit;
I took no kep, so that he liked me,
How poore he was, ne eek of what degree.




56) The Masque of Blackness (1605)


Who though they were the m first form'd Dames of earth, 
And in whose sparckling, and refulgent eyes, 
The glorious Sunne did still delight to rise; 
Though he (the best Iudge, and most formall cause Of all Dames beauties) in their firm hiewes, drawes 
Signes of his feruent'st Loue; and thereby shewes 
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty growes; 
Since the fix't colour of their curled haire, (Which is the highest grace of dames most faire) 
No cares, no age can change; or there display 
The fearefull tincture of abhorred Gray; 
Since Death hir selfe (hir selfe being pale & blue) 
Can neuer alter their most faith-full hew; 
All which are arguments, to proue, how far 
Their beauties conquer, in great Beauties warre; 
And more, how neere Diuinity they be, 
That stand from passion, or decay so free. 
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few 
Poore brain-sicke men, stil'd Poets, here with you, 
Haue, with such enuy of their graces, sung 
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung; 
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly 
To infect all clymates, yea our purity;




57) The Duchess of Malfi (1612)


Most true:
  He never pays debts unless they be shrewd turns,
  And those he will confess that he doth owe.
  Last, for this brother there, the cardinal,
  They that do flatter him most say oracles
  Hang at his lips; and verily I believe them,
  For the devil speaks in them.
  But for their sister, the right noble duchess,
  You never fix'd your eye on three fair medals
  Cast in one figure, of so different temper.
  For her discourse, it is so full of rapture,
  You only will begin then to be sorry
  When she doth end her speech, and wish, in wonder,
  She held it less vain-glory to talk much,
  Than your penance to hear her.  Whilst she speaks,
  She throws upon a man so sweet a look
  That it were able to raise one to a galliard.
  That lay in a dead palsy, and to dote
  On that sweet countenance; but in that look
  There speaketh so divine a continence
  As cuts off all lascivious and vain hope.
  Her days are practis'd in such noble virtue,
  That sure her nights, nay, more, her very sleeps,
  Are more in heaven than other ladies' shrifts.
  Let all sweet ladies break their flatt'ring glasses,
  And dress themselves in her.




58) The London and Country Brewer (1736)


Malt Liquors, as well as several others, have long lain under the disreputation of being adulterated and greatly abused by avaricious and ill-principled People, to augment their Profits at the Expence of the precious Health of human Bodies, which, tho' the greatest Jewel in Life, is said to be too often lost by the Deceit of the Brewer, and the Intemperance of the Drinker: This undoubtedly was one, and I believe the greatest, of the Lord Bacon's Reasons for saying, he thought not one Englishman in a thousand died a natural Death. Nor is it indeed to be much wondered at, when, according to Report, several of the Publicans make it their Business to study and practise this Art, witness what I am afraid is too true, that some have made use of the Coculus India Berry for making Drink heady, and saving the Expence of Malt; but as this is a violent Potion by its narcotick stupifying Quality, if taken in too large a degree, I hope this will be rather a prevention of its use than an invitation, it being so much of the nature of the deadly Nightshade, that it bears the same Character; and I am sure the latter is bad enough; for one of my Neighbour's Brothers was killed by eating its Berries that grow in some of our Hedges, and so neatly resembles the black Cherry, that the Boy took the wrong for the right.




59) The Sceptical Chymist (1661)


And first, one sort of Opposers will be forward to tell me, That they do not pretend by Fire alone to separate out of all compound Bodies their Hypostatical Principles; it being sufficient that the Fire divides them into such, though afterwards they employ other Bodies to collect the similar parts of the Compound; as ’tis known, that though they make use of water to collect the Saline parts of Ashes from the Terrestrial wherewith they are blended, yet it is the Fire only that Incinerates Bodies, and reduces the fix’d part of them into the Salt and Earth, whereof Ashes are made up. This Objection is not, I confess, inconsiderable, and I might in great part allow of it, without granting it to make against me, if I would content my self to answer, that it is not against those that make it that I have been disputing, but against those Vulgar Chymists, who themselves believe, and would fain make others do so, That the Fire is not only
 an universal, but an adæquate and sufficient Instrument to analyze mixt Bodies with. For as to their Practice of Extracting the fix’d Salt out of Ashes by the Affusion of Water, ’tis obvious to alleadge, that the Water does only assemble together the Salt the Fire had before divided from the Earth: as a Sieve does not further break the Corn, but only bring together into two distinct heaps the Flour and the Bran, whose Corpuscles before lay promiscuously blended together in the Meal. This I say I might alleadge, and thereby exempt my self from the need of taking any farther notice of the propos’d Objection. But not to lose the Rise it may afford me of Illustrating the matter under Consideration, I am content briefly to consider it, as far forth as my present Disquisition may be concern’d in it.






60) The Winter’s Tale (1611)


What? Have I twice said well? When was't before?
I prithee tell me. Cram's with praise, and make's
As fat as tame things. One good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages. You may ride's
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we heat an acre. But to th'goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
What was my first? It has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you - O, would her name were Grace! -
But once before I spoke to th'purpose: when?
Nay, let me have't: I long.




61) To His Coy Mistress (1681)


Had we but world enough and time,
This coyness, lady, were no crime.
We would sit down, and think which way
To walk, and pass our long love’s day.
Thou by the Indian Ganges’ side
Shouldst rubies find; I by the tide
Of Humber would complain. I would
Love you ten years before the flood,
And you should, if you please, refuse
Till the conversion of the Jews.
My vegetable love should grow
Vaster than empires and more slow;
An hundred years should go to praise
Thine eyes, and on thy forehead gaze;
Two hundred to adore each breast,
But thirty thousand to the rest;
An age at least to every part,
And the last age should show your heart.
For, lady, you deserve this state,
Nor would I love at lower rate.
           But at my back I always hear
Time’s wingèd chariot hurrying near;
And yonder all before us lie
Deserts of vast eternity.
Thy beauty shall no more be found;
Nor, in thy marble vault, shall sound
My echoing song; then worms shall try
That long-preserved virginity,
And your quaint honour turn to dust,
And into ashes all my lust;
The grave’s a fine and private place,
But none, I think, do there embrace.
  


62) Paradise Regained (poem) (1671)


Well have we speeded, and o'er hill and dale,
Forest, and field, and flood, temples and towers,
Cut shorter many a league. Here thou behold'st
Assyria, and her empire's ancient bounds,
Araxes and the Caspian lake; thence on
As far as Indus east, Euphrates west,
And oft beyond; to south the Persian bay,
And, inaccessible, the Arabian drouth:
Here, Nineveh, of length within her wall
Several days' journey, built by Ninus old,
Of that first golden monarchy the seat,
And seat of Salmanassar, whose success
Israel in long captivity still mourns;
There Babylon, the wonder of all tongues,
As ancient, but rebuilt by him who twice
Judah and all thy father David's house
Led captive, and Jerusalem laid waste,
Till Cyrus set them free; Persepolis,
His city, there thou seest, and Bactra there;
Ecbatana her structure vast there shews,
And Hecatompylos her hundred gates;




63) The Country Wife (1675)


Doctor, thou wilt never make a good chemist, thou art so incredulous and impatient. Ask but all the young fellows of the town if they do not lose more time, like huntsmen, in starting the game, than in running it down. One knows not where to find 'em; who will or will not. Women of quality are so civil, you can hardly distinguish love from good breeding, and a man is often mistaken: but now I can be sure she that shows an aversion to me loves the sport, as those women that are gone, whom I warrant to be right. And then the next thing is, your women of honour, as you call 'em, are only chary of their reputations, not their persons; and 'tis scandal they would avoid, not men. Now may I have, by the reputation of an eunuch, the privileges of one, and be seen in a lady's chamber in a morning as early as her husband; kiss virgins before their parents or lovers; and may be, in short, the passe-partout of the town. Now, doctor.




64) The Second Treatise of Government (1689)


The like natural inducement hath brought men to know that it is no less their duty, to love others than themselves; for seeing those things which are equal, must needs all have one measure; if I cannot but wish to receive good, even as much at every man’s hands, as any man can wish unto his own soul, how should I look to have any part of my desire herein satisfied, unless myself be careful to satisfy the like desire, which is undoubtedly in other men, being of one and the same nature? To have any thing offered them repugnant to this desire, must needs in all respects grieve them as much as me; so that if I do harm, I must look to suffer, there being no reason that others should shew greater measure of love to me, than they have by me shewed unto them: my desire therefore to be loved of my equals in nature as much as possible may be, imposeth upon me a natural duty of bearing to them-ward fully the like affection; from which relation of equality between ourselves and them that are as ourselves, what several rules and canons natural reason hath drawn, for direction of life, no man is ignorant




65) The Man of Mode (1676)
What alteration a twelvemonth may have bred in her I know not, but a year ago she was the beautifulest creature I ever saw: a fine, easy, clean shape; light brown hair in abundance; her features regular; her complexion clear and lively; large wanton eyes; but above all, a mouth that has made me kiss it a thousand times in imagination—teeth white and even, and pretty pouting lips, with a little moisture ever hanging on them, that look like the Provins rose fresh on the bush, ere the morning sun has quite drawn up the dew. 




66) The Way of the World (1700)


And for a discerning man somewhat too passionate a lover, for I like her with all her faults; nay, like her for her faults.  Her follies are so natural, or so artful, that they become her, and those affectations which in another woman would be odious serve but to make her more agreeable.  I’ll tell thee, Fainall, she once used me with that insolence that in revenge I took her to pieces, sifted her, and separated her failings: I studied ’em and got ’em by rote.  The catalogue was so large that I was not without hopes, one day or other, to hate her heartily.  To which end I so used myself to think of ’em, that at length, contrary to my design and expectation, they gave me every hour less and less disturbance, till in a few days it became habitual to me to remember ’em without being displeased.  They are now grown as familiar to me as my own frailties, and in all probability in a little time longer I shall like ’em as well.






67) The Rape of the Lock (poem) (1712)


Sol thro' white curtains shot a tim'rous ray,
And op'd those eyes that must eclipse the day;
Now lap-dogs give themselves the rousing shake,
And sleepless lovers, just at twelve, awake:
Thrice rung the bell, the slipper knock'd the ground,
And the press'd watch return'd a silver sound.
Belinda still her downy pillow press'd,
Her guardian sylph prolong'd the balmy rest:
'Twas he had summon'd to her silent bed
The morning dream that hover'd o'er her head;
A youth more glitt'ring than a birthnight beau,
(That ev'n in slumber caus'd her cheek to glow)
Seem'd to her ear his winning lips to lay,
And thus in whispers said, or seem'd to say.




68) The Blazing World (1666)


But the Duchess's Soul being troubled, that her dear Lord and Husband used such a violent exercise before meat, for fear of overheating himself, without any consideration of the Empress's Soul, left her Æreal Vehicle, and entred into her Lord. The Empress's Soul perceiving this, did the like: And then the Duke had three Souls in one Body; and had there been some such Souls more, the Duke would have been like the Grand-Signior in his Seraglio, onely it would have been a Platonick Seraglio.
Adventure, and not being provided for so cold a Voyage, were all frozen to death; the young Lady onely, by the light of her Beauty, the heat of her Youth, and Protection of the Gods, remaining alive: Neither was it a wonder that the men did freeze to death; for they were not onely driven to the very end or point of the Pole of that World, but even to another Pole of another World, which






69) The Hind and the Panther (poem) (1687)


Not so her young; for their unequal line
Was hero's make, half human, half divine.
Their earthly mold obnoxious was to fate,
Th' immortal part assum'd immortal state.
Of these a slaughter'd army lay in blood,
Extended o'er the Caledonian wood,
Their native walk; whose vocal blood arose,
And cried for pardon on their perjur'd foes.
Their fate was fruitful, and the sanguine seed,
Endued with souls, increas'd the sacred breed.
So captive Israel multiplied in chains,
A numerous exile, and enjoy'd her pains.
With grief and gladness mix'd, their mother view'd
Her martyr'd offspring, and their race renew'd;
Their corps to perish, but their kind to last,
So much the deathless plant the dying fruit surpass'd.




70) Oroonoko (1688)


But before I give you the Story of this Gallant Slave, ’tis fit I tell you the manner of bringing them to these new Colonies; for those they make use of there, are not Natives of the place; for those we live with in perfect Amity, without daring to command ’em; but on the contrary, caress ’em with all the brotherly and friendly Affection in the World; trading with ’em for their Fish, Venison, Buffilo’s, Skins, and little Rarities; as Marmosets, a sort of Monkey as big as a Rat or Weesel, but of a marvellous and delicate shape, and has Face and Hands like an Humane Creature: and Cousheries, a little Beast in the form and fashion of a Lion, as big as a Kitten; but so exactly made in all parts like that noble Beast, that it is it in Minature. Then for little Parakeetoes, great Parrots, Muckaws, and a thousand other Birds and Beasts of wonderful and surprizing Forms, Shapes, and Colours. For Skins of prodigious Snakes, of which there are some threescore Yards in length; as is the Skin of one that may be seen at His Majesty’s Antiquaries: Where are also some rare Flies, of amazing Forms and Colours, presented to ’em by my self; some as big as my Fist, some less; and all of various Excellencies, such as Art cannot imitate. Then we trade for Feathers, which they order into all Shapes, make themselves little short Habits of ’em, and glorious Wreaths for their Heads, Necks, Arms and Legs, whose Tinctures are unconceivable. I had a Set of these presented to me, and I gave ’em to the King’s Theatre, and it was the Dress of the Indian Queen, infinitely admir’d by Persons of Quality; and were unimitable. Besides these, a thousand little Knacks, and Rarities in Nature, and some of Art; as their Baskets, Weapons, Aprons, &c. We dealt with ’em with Beads of all Colours, Knives, Axes, Pins and Needles; which they us’d only as Tools to drill Holes with in their Ears, Noses and Lips, where they hang a great many little things; as long Beads, bits of Tin, Brass, or Silver, beat thin; and any shining Trincket. The Beads they weave into Aprons about a quarter of an Ell long, and of the same breadth; working them very prettily in Flowers of several Colours of Beads; which Apron they wear just before ’em, as Adam and Eve did the Fig-leaves; the Men wearing a long Stripe of Linen, which they deal with us for. They thread these Beads also on long Cotton-threads, and make Girdles to tie their Aprons to, which come twenty times, or more, about the Waste; and then cross, like a Shoulder-belt, both ways, and round their Necks, Arms and Legs. This Adornment, with their long black Hair, and the Face painted in little Specks or Flowers here and there, makes ’em a wonderful Figure to behold. Some of the Beauties which indeed are finely shap’d, as almost all are, and who have pretty Features, are very charming and novel; for they have all that is called Beauty, except the Colour, which is a reddish Yellow; or after a new Oiling, which they often use to themselves, they are of the colour of a new Brick, but smooth, soft and sleek. They are extream modest and bashful, very shy, and nice of being touch’d. And though they are all thus naked, if one lives for ever among ’em, there is not to be seen an indecent Action, or Glance; and being continually us’d to see one another so unadorn’d, so like our first Parents before the Fall, it seems as if they had no Wishes; there being nothing to heighten Curiosity, but all you can see, you see at once, and every Moment see; and where there is no Novelty, there can be no Curiosity. Not but I have seen a handsom young Indian, dying for Love of a very beautiful young Indian Maid; but all his Courtship was, to fold his Arms, pursue her with his Eyes, and Sighs were all his Language: While she, as if no such Lover were present; or rather, as if she desired none such, carefully guarded her Eyes from beholding him; and never approach’d him, but she look’d down with all the blushing Modesty I have seen in the most severe and cautious of our World. And these People represented to me an absolute Idea of the first State of Innocence, before Man knew how to sin: And ’tis most evident and plain, that simple Nature is the most harmless, inoffensive and vertuous Mistress. ’Tis she alone, if she were permitted, that better instructs the World, than all the Inventions of Man: Religion wou’d here but destroy that Tranquillity, they possess by Ignorance; and Laws wou’d but teach ’em to know Offence, of which now they have no Notion. They once made Mourning and Fasting for the Death of the English Governor, who had given his Hand to come on such a Day to ’em, and neither came, nor sent; believing, when once a Man’s Word was past, nothing but Death cou’d or shou’d prevent his keeping it: And when they saw he was not dead, they ask’d him, what Name they had for a Man who promis’d a thing he did not do? The Governor told them, Such a man was a Lyar, which was a Word of Infamy to a Gentleman. Then one of ’em reply’d, Governor, you are a Lyar, and guilty of that Infamy. They have a Native Justice, which knows no Fraud; and they understand no Vice, or Cunning, but when they are taught by the White Men.They have Plurality of Wives, which, when they grow old, they serve those that succeed ’em, who are young; but with a Servitude easie and respected; and unless they take Slaves in War, they have no other Attendants.




71) Eikon Basilike (1649)


But then, O God, of thy infinit mercies forgive me that act of sinfull compliance, which hath greater aggravations upon me then any man, Since I had not the least temptation of envy, or malice against him, and by my place should, at least so farre, have been a preserver of him, as to have denied my consent to his destruction.
O Lord, I acknowledge my transgression, and my sin is ever before me.
Deliver me from blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my salvation, and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.
Against thee have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, for thou sawest the contradiction between my heart and my hand.
Yet cast me not away from thy presence, purge me with the blood of my Redeemer, and I shall be clear; wash me with that pretious effusion, and I shall be whiter then snow.
Teach me to learn Righteousnesse by thy Iudgements, and to see my frailtie in thy Iustice: while I was perswaded by shedding one mans bloud to prevent after-troubles, thou hast for that, among other sins, brought upon mee, and upon my Kingdoms, great, long, and heavy troubles.




72) Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded (1740)


Well, I will now proceed with my sad story. And so, after I had dried my eyes, I went in, and began to ruminate with myself what I had best to do. Sometimes I thought I would leave the house and go to the next town, and wait an opportunity to get to you; but then I was at a loss to resolve whether to take away the things he had given me or no, and how to take them away: Sometimes I thought to leave them behind me, and only go with the clothes on my back, but then I had two miles and a half, and a byway, to the town; and being pretty well dressed, I might come to some harm, almost as bad as what I would run away from; and then may-be, thought I, it will be reported, I have stolen something, and so was forced to run away; and to carry a bad name back with me to my dear parents, would be a sad thing indeed!—O how I wished for my grey russet again, and my poor honest dress, with which you fitted me out, (and hard enough too it was for you to do it!) for going to this place, when I was not twelve years old, in my good lady’s days! Sometimes I thought of telling Mrs. Jervis, and taking her advice, and only feared his command to be secret; for, thought I, he may be ashamed of his actions, and never attempt the like again: And as poor Mrs. Jervis depended upon him, through misfortunes, that had attended her, I thought it would be a sad thing to bring his displeasure upon her for my sake.



73) King Lear (1606)
Let it be so: thy truth then be thy dower,
For by the sacred radiance of the sun,
The mysteries of Hecate and the night,
By all the operation of the orbs
From whom we do exist and cease to be,
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighboured, pitied and relieved
As thou my sometime daughter.




74) The New Atlantis (1627)
When we were come within six yards of their boat, they called to us to stay, and not to approach farther; which we did. And thereupon the man, whom I before described, stood up, and with a loud voice, in Spanish, asked, "Are ye Christians?" We answered, "We were;" fearing the less, because of the cross we had seen in the subscription. At which answer the said person lifted up his right hand towards Heaven, and drew it softly to his mouth (which is the gesture they use, when they thank God;) and then said: "If ye will swear (all of you) by the merits of the Saviour, that ye are no pirates, nor have shed blood, lawfully, nor unlawfully within forty days past, you may have licence to come on land." We said, "We were all ready to take that oath." Whereupon one of those that were with him, being (as it seemed) a notary, made an entry of this act. Which done, another of the attendants of the great person which was with him in the same boat, after his Lord had spoken a little to him, said aloud: "My Lord would have you know, that it is not of pride, or greatness, that he cometh not aboard your ship; but for that in your answer you declare that you have many sick amongst you, he was warned by the Conservator of Health of the city that he should keep a distance." We bowed ourselves towards him, and answered, "We were his humble servants; and accounted for great honour, and singular humanity towards us, that which was already done; but hoped well, that the nature of the sickness of our men was not infectious." So he returned; and a while after came the Notary to us aboard our ship; holding in his hand a fruit of that country, like an orange, but of color between orange-tawney and scarlet; which cast a most excellent odour. He used it (as it seemeth) for a preservative against infection. He gave us our oath; "By the name of Jesus, and his merits:" and after told us, that the next day, by six of the Clock, in the Morning, we should be sent to, and brought to the Strangers' House, (so he called it,) where we should be accommodated of things, both for our whole, and for our sick. So he left us; and when we offered him some pistolets, he smiling said, "He must not be twice paid for one labour:" meaning (as I take it) that he had salary sufficient of the State for his service. For (as I after learned) they call an officer that taketh rewards, "twice paid."


75) The Alchemist (1610)


'Tis like your Irish wood,
  'Gainst cob-webs. I have a piece of Jason's fleece, too,
  Which was no other than a book of alchemy,
  Writ in large sheep-skin, a good fat ram-vellum.
  Such was Pythagoras' thigh, Pandora's tub,
  And, all that fable of Medea's charms,
  The manner of our work; the bulls, our furnace,
  Still breathing fire; our argent-vive, the dragon:
  The dragon's teeth, mercury sublimate,
  That keeps the whiteness, hardness, and the biting;
  And they are gathered into Jason's helm,
  The alembic, and then sow'd in Mars his field,
  And thence sublimed so often, till they're fixed.
  Both this, the Hesperian garden, Cadmus' story,
  Jove's shower, the boon of Midas, Argus' eyes,
  Boccace his Demogorgon, thousands more,
  All abstract riddles of our stone.






76) Utopia (1516)


If a man aspire ambitiously to any office, he loseth it for certain. They live in loving intercourse with each other, the magistrates never behaving either insolently or cruelly to the people. They affect rather to be called fathers, and by really being such, well merit the appellation. The people pay them all marks of honour, the more freely because none are exacted from them. The prince himself hath no distinction either of garments or a crown; a sheaf of corn only is carried before him, and a wax-light before the highpriest. They have few laws and such is their constitution, they require not many. They much condemn other countries, whose laws, with the commentaries on them, swell so mamy volumes; esteeming it unreasonable to oblige men to obey a body of laws so large and intricate, as not to be read and understood by every subject. They have no lawyers among them. For they esteem them a class, whose profession it is to disguise matters, and to writhe the laws. Therefore they think it much better that every man should plead his own cause, and trust it to the judge, as elsewhere the client trusteth it to his counsellor. By this plan they avoid many delays, and find out the truth with more certainty. For after the parties have opened the merits of the cause without the artifices of lawyers, the judge examines the matter and supports the simplicity of those well-meaning persons whom otherwise the crafty would run down. And thus they avoid those evils which appear so remarkable in those countries which labour under a vast load of laws. Every one of them is skilled in their law. It is a very short study, and the plainest meaning of which words are capable, is ever the sense of it. They argue thus. All laws are promulgated that every man may know his duty. Therefore the plainest construction of words is, what ought to be put upon them. A more refined exposition could not easily be comprehended, and would only make the laws useless to the greater part of mankind, especially to those who most need the guidance of them. It is the same thing, whether you make no law at all, or couch it in terms of which, without a quick apprehension and much study, men cannot find out the true meaning; for the generality of mankind are so dull and so busied in their avocations, that they have neither the leisure nor capacity requisite for such an inquiry.




77) Orlando Furiso (poem) (1516)


Roland, who long the lady of Catay,
Angelica, had loved, and with his brand
Raised countless trophies to that damsel gay,
In India, Median, and Tartarian land,
Westward with her had measured back his way;
Where, nigh the Pyrenees, with many a band
Of Germany and France, King Charlemagne
Had camped his faithful host upon the plain.


To make King Agramant, for penance, smite
His cheek, and rash Marsilius rue the hour;
This, when all trained with lance and sword to fight,
He led from Africa to swell his power;
That other when he pushed, in fell despite,
Against the realm of France Spain's martial flower.
'Twas thus Orlando came where Charles was tented
In evil hour, and soon the deed repented.






78) Don Quixote (1605)
You must know, then, that the above-named gentleman whenever he was at leisure (which was mostly all the year round) gave himself up to reading books of chivalry with such ardour and avidity that he almost entirely neglected the pursuit of his field-sports, and even the management of his property; and to such a pitch did his eagerness and infatuation go that he sold many an acre of tillageland to buy books of chivalry to read, and brought home as many of them as he could get. But of all there were none he liked so well as those of the famous Feliciano de Silva's composition, for their lucidity of style and complicated conceits were as pearls in his sight, particularly when in his reading he came upon courtships and cartels, where he often found passages like "the reason of the unreason with which my reason is afflicted so weakens my reason that with reason I murmur at your beauty;" or again, "the high heavens, that of your divinity divinely fortify you with the stars, render you deserving of the desert your greatness deserves." Over conceits of this sort the poor gentleman lost his wits, and used to lie awake striving to understand them and worm the meaning out of them; what Aristotle himself could not have made out or extracted had he come to life again for that special purpose. He was not at all easy about the wounds which Don Belianis gave and took, because it seemed to him that, great as were the surgeons who had cured him, he must have had his face and body covered all over with seams and scars. He commended, however, the author's way of ending his book with the promise of that interminable adventure, and many a time was he tempted to take up his pen and finish it properly as is there proposed, which no doubt he would have done, and made a successful piece of work of it too, had not greater and more absorbing thoughts prevented him.




79) Othello (1603)


O, sir, content you:
I follow him to serve my turn upon him.
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That - doting on his own obsequious bondage -
Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
For nought but provender, and when he's old, cashiered:
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do well thrive by them,
And when they have lined their coats
Do themselves homage: these fellows have some soul,
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Rodorigo,
Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but myself.
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so, for my peculiar end,
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In compliment extern, 'tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.




80) Romeo and Juliet (1597)


Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,— Will they not hear? What ho! you men, you beasts, That quench the fire of your pernicious rage With purple fountains issuing from your veins, On pain of torture, from those bloody hands Throw your mis-temper’d weapons to the ground, And hear the sentence of your moved prince. Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, By thee, old Capulet, and Montague, Have thrice disturb’d the quiet of our streets, And made Verona’s ancient citizens Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments, To wield old partisans, in hands as old, Canker’d with peace, to part your canker’d hate. If ever you disturb our streets again Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. For this time, all the rest depart away: You, Capulet, shall go along with me; And, Montague, come you this afternoon To know our further pleasure in this case, To old Free-town, our common judgment-place. Once more, on pain of death, all men depart. Exeunt all but Montague, Lady Montague, and Benvolio.






81) Antony and Cleopatra (1607)


Speak to me home, mince not the general tongue:
Name Cleopatra as she is call'd in Rome;
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase; and taunt my faults
With such full licence as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds,
When our quick minds lie still; and our ills told us
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.






82) Religio Medici (1642)


But to difference my self neerer, & draw into a lesser circle: There is no Church whose every part so squares unto my conscience, whose articles, constitutions, and customes seeme so consonant unto reason, and as it were framed to my particular devotion, as this whereof I hold my beliefe, the Church of England, to whose faith I am a sworne subject, and therefore in a double obligation, subscribe unto her Articles, and endeavour to observe her Constitutions: whatsoever is beyond, as points indifferent, I observe according to the rules of my private reason, or the humor and fashion of my devotion, neither believing this, because Luther affirmed it, or disproving that, because Calvin hath disavouched it. I condemne not all things in the Councell of Trent, nor approve all in the Synod of Dort. In briefe, where the Scripture is silent, the Church is my Text; where that speakes, 'tis but my Comment; where there is a joynt silence of both, I borrow not the rules of my Religion from Rome or Geneva, but the dictates of my own reason. It is an unjust scandall of our adversaries, and a gross error in our selves, to compute the Nativity of our Religion from Henry the eight, who though he rejected the Pope, refus'd not the faith of Rome,K12 and effected no more then what his owne Predecessors desired and assayed in ages past, and was conceived the State of Venice would have attempted in our dayes.K13 It is as uncharitable a point in us to fall upon those popular scurrilities and opprobrious scoffes of the Bishop of Rome, whom as a temporall Prince, we owe the duty of good language; I confesse there is cause of passion betweene us; by his sentence I stand excommunicated, Heretick is the best language he affords me; yet can no eare witnesse I ever returned to him the name of Antichrist, Man of sin, or whore of Babylon; It is the method of charity to suffer without reaction: those usuall Satyrs, and invectives of the Pulpit may perchance produce a good effect on the vulgar, whose eares are opener to Rhetorick then Logick, yet doe they in no wise confirme the faith of wiser beleevers, who know that a good cause needs not to be patron'd by a passion, but can sustaine it selfe upon a temperate dispute.




83) Julius Caesar (1599)


Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome
To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things:
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Have you climbed up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows? Yea, to chimney-tops,
Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
The livelong day, with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome:
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have you not made an universal shout,
That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
To hear the replication of your sounds
Made in her concave shores?
And do you now put on your best attire?
And do you now cull out a holiday?
And do you now strew flowers in his way
That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?
Be gone!
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
That needs must light on this ingratitude.
 


84) The Tempest (1611)


This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child 
And here was left by the sailors. Thou, my slave, 
As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant; 
And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate 
To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands, 
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee, 
By help of her more potent ministers 
And in her most unmitigable rage, 
Into a cloven pine; within which rift 
Imprison'd thou didst painfully remain 
A dozen years; within which space she died 
And left thee there; where thou didst vent thy groans 
As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island-- 
Save for the son that she did litter here, 
A freckled whelp hag-born--not honour'd with 
A human shape.




85) Microcosmography (1628)


Is one whom all other means have failed, and he now lives of himself. He is some needy cashiered fellow, whom the world hath oft flung off, yet still clasps again, and is like one a drowning, fastens upon anything that is next at hand. Amongst other of his shipwrecks he has happily lost shame, and this want supplies him. No man puts his brain to more use than he, for his life is a daily invention, and each meal a new stratagem. He has an excellent memory for his acquaintance, though there passed but how do you betwixt them seven years ago, it shall suffice for an embrace, and that for money. He offers you a pottle of sack out of joy to see you, and in requital of his courtesy you can do no less than pay for it. He is fumbling with his purse-strings, as a school-boy with his points, when he is going to be whipped, 'till the master, weary with long stay, forgives him. When the reckoning is paid, he says, It must not be so, yet is strait pacified, and cries, What remedy? His borrowings are like subsidies, each man a shilling or two, as he can well dispend; which they lend him, not with a hope to be repaid, but that he will come no more. He holds a strange tyrrany over men, for he is their debtor, and they fear him as a creditor. He is proud of any employment, though it be but to carry commendations, which he will be sure to deliver at eleven of the clock.They in courtesy bid him stay, and he in manners cannot deny them. If he find but a good look to assure his welcome, he becomes their half-boarder, and haunts the threshold so long 'till he forces good nature to the necessity of a quarrel. Publick invitations he will not wrong with his absence, and is the best witness of the sheriff's hospitality.Men shun him at length as they would do an infection, and he is never crossed in his way if there be but a lane to escape him. He has done with the age as his clothes to him, hung on as long as he could, and at last drops off.






86) The Man in the Moone (1638)


I found then by this Experience that which no Philosopher ever dreamed of, to wit, that those things which wee call heavie, do not sinke toward the Center of the Earth, as their naturall place, but as drawen by a secret property of the same, in like sort as the Loadstone draweth Iron, being within the compass of the beames attractive.




87) Twelfth Night (1623)


If music be the food of love, play on,
Give me excess of it, that surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken and so die.
That strain again, it had a dying fall:
O, it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound
That breathes upon a bank of violets,
Stealing and giving odour. Enough, no more,
'Tis not so sweet now as it was before. Music stops
O spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou
That, notwithstanding thy capacity,
Receiveth as the sea. Nought enters there,
Of what validity and pitch soe'er,
But falls into abatement and low price
Even in a minute. So full of shapes is fancy
That it alone is high fantastical.




88) The Life and Death of Mr Bagman (1680)
Why?  I think, as you say, to wit, that they are bad times, and bad they will be, untill men are better: for they are bad men that make bad times; if men therefore would mend, so would the times.  ’Tis a folly to look for good dayes, so long as sin is so high, and those that study its nourishment so many.  God bring it down, and those that nourish it to Repentance, and then my good Neighbour, you will be concerned, not as you are now: Now you are concerned because times are so bad; but then you will be so, ’cause times are so good: Now you are concerned so as to be perplexed, but then you will be concerned so as to lift up your voice with shouting; for I dare say, could you see such dayes they would make you shout.


89) All for Love (1677)
You are too sensible already
Of what you've done, too conscious of your failings;
And, like a scorpion, whipt by others first
To fury, sting yourself in mad revenge.
I would bring balm, and pour it in your wounds,
Cure your distempered mind, and heal your fortunes.




90) The Man of Mode (1676)


What alteration a twelvemonth may have bred in her I know not, but a year ago she was the beautifulest creature I ever saw: a fine, easy, clean shape; light brown hair in abundance; her features regular; her complexion clear and lively; large wanton eyes; but above all, a mouth that has made me kiss it a thousand times in imagination—teeth white and even, and pretty pouting lips, with a little moisture ever hanging on them, that look like the Provins rose fresh on the bush, ere the morning sun has quite drawn up the dew. 




91) All’s Well that Ends Well (1623)


O, were that all! I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him. My imagination
Carries no favour in't but Bertram's.
I am undone. There is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me.
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere;
Th'ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour, to sit and draw
His archèd brows, his hawking eye, his curls
In our heart's table - heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour:
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his relics. Who comes here?




92) Timon of Athens (1623)
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Feigned Fortune to be throned. The base o’ th’ mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of natures
That labor on the bosom of this sphere
To propagate their states. Amongst them all
Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fixed,
One do I personate of Lord Timon’s frame,
Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace to present slaves and servants
Translates his rivals.




93) A Woman Killed with Kindness (1607)


Lord, sir, in what a happy state live you!
This morning, which to many seems a burden,
Too heavy to bear, is unto you a pleasure.
This lady is no clog, as many are ;
She doth become you like a well-made suit,
In which the tailor hath us'd all his art;
Not like a thick coat of unseason'd frieze,
Forc'd on your back in Summer. She 's no chain
To tie your neck, and curb you to the yoke ;
But she's a chain of gold to adorn your neck.
You both adorn each other, and your hands,
Methinks, are matches. There's equality
In this fair combination; you are both
Scholars, both young, both being descended nobly.
There's music in this sympathy ; it carries
Consort and expectation of much joy,
Which God bestow on you from this first day
Until your dissolution, — that's for aye !




94) A Fair Quarrel (1617)


Can art be so dim-sighted, learned sir?
I did not think her so incapacious.
You train me, as I guess, like a conjuror,
One of our [fine] oraculous wizards,
Who, from the help of his examinant,
By the near guess of his suspicion,
Appoints out the thief by the marks he tells him.
Have you no skill in physiognomy?
What colour, says your coat, is my disease?
I am unmarried, and it cannot be yellow;
If it be maiden green, you cannot miss it.




95) Coriolanus (1623)


When you curse them as enemies.


first citizen Care for us? True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us yet: suffer us to famish, and their storehouses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear us.




96) Argalus and Parthenia (1629)


WIthin the limits of th'Arcadian land,
Whose gratefull bounty hath inricht the hand
Of many a Shepherd swaine, whose rurall Art
(Vntaught to gloze, or with a double heart
To vow dissembled loue) did build to Fame
Eternall Trophies of a pastorall name;
That sweet Arcadia; which, in antique dayes,
Was wont to warble out her well-tun'd layes
To all the world; and, with her oaten Reede,
Did sing her loue whilst her proud flocks did feed;
Arcadia, whose deserts did claime to be
As great a sharer in the Daphnean tree,
As his, whose louder Aenead proudly sings
Heroick conquests of victorious Kings;
There (if th'exuberance of a word may swell
So high, that Angels may be said, to dwell)
There dwelt that Virgin, that Arcadian glory,
Whose rare composure did abstract the story
Of true perfection, modellizing forth
The •…eight of beauty, and admired worth;




97) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1496)


Who then will not look with awe upon this our chameleon, or who, at least, will look with greater admiration on any other being? This creature, man, whom Asclepius the Athenian, by reason of this very mutability, this nature capable of transforming itself, quite rightly said was symbolized in the mysteries by the figure of Proteus. This is the source of those metamorphoses, or transformations, so celebrated among the Hebrews and among the Pythagoreans; for even the esoteric theology of the Hebrews at times transforms the holy Enoch into that angel of divinity which is sometimes called malakh-ha-shekhinah and at other times transforms other personages into divinities of other names; while the Pythagoreans transform men guilty of crimes into brutes or even, if we are to believe Empedocles, into plants; and Mohammed, imitating them, was known frequently to say that the man who deserts the divine law becomes a brute. And he was right; for it is not the bark that makes the tree, but its insensitive and unresponsive nature; nor the hide which makes the beast of burden, but its brute and sensual soul; nor the orbicular form which makes the heavens, but their harmonious order. Finally, it is not freedom from a body, but its spiritual intelligence, which makes the angel. If you see a man dedicated to his stomach, crawling on the ground, you see a plant and not a man; or if you see a man bedazzled by the empty forms of the imagination, as by the wiles of Calypso, and through their alluring solicitations made a slave to his own senses, you see a brute and not a man. If, however, you see a philosopher, judging and distinguishing all things according to the rule of reason, him shall you hold in veneration, for he is a creature of heaven and not of earth; if, finally, a pure contemplator, unmindful of the body, wholly withdrawn into the inner chambers of the mind, here indeed is neither a creature of earth nor a heavenly creature, but some higher divinity, clothed in human flesh.




98) The Roaring Girl (1611)


The furniture that doth adorn this room, Cost many a fair gray groat ere it came here, But good things are most cheap, when th’ are most dear, Nay when you look into my galleries, How bravely they are trimmed up, you all shall swear Y’ are highly pleased to see what’s set down there: Stories of men and women (mixed together Fair ones with foul, like sunshine in wet weather) Within one square a thousand heads are laid So close, that all of heads, the room seems made, As many faces there (filled with blithe looks) Show like the promising titles of new books, (Writ merrily) the Readers being their own eyes, Which seem to move and to give plaudities, And here and there (whilst with obsequious ears, Thronged heaps do listen) a cutpurse thrusts and leers With hawk’s eyes for his prey: I need not show him, By a hanging villainous look, yourselves may know him, The face is drawn so rarely, Then sir below, The very floor (as ’twere) waves to and fro, And like a floating Island, seems to move, Upon a sea bound in with shores above,




99) The Taming of Shrew (1590)


O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were convey'd to bed,
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?




100) Romeo and Juliet (1597)


Tis but thy name that is my enemy; Thou art thyself, though not a Montague. What’s Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot, Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part Belonging to a man. O! be some other name: What’s in a name? that which we call a rose By any other name would smell as sweet; So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call’d, Retain that dear perfection which he owes Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name; And for that name, which is no part of thee, Take all myself.